“T » NI 2 N D
S — wu

od
Y

Effective Writing Skills
For
Advanced Learners

vary trrennoe com inn bir ehonice
www.jaceboon.com/tanbir.eo0orK.

(e

By
S. M. Zakir Humain, mea

Author of
Tactics for Effective Reading & Critical Thinking
A Systematic Approach to Critical Reasoning & Analytical Ability
A Passage to the English Language (Grammar)
A High Level English Course (Books 1 & 2)
Word Leaming Magic (Books 1 , 2, & 3)
Tactics for Learning Prepositions
Word Making Tactics (Books 1 & 2)
How to Speak English Fluently
The Anatomy of the English Sentence
Short-Cut Ways of Speaking English
British & American English Differentiated
Tough English Made Simple
Magic Rules of Pronunciation
A Comprehensive Textbook of Degree English
SISTES AS: EA STRAT GPT
en Sra farm (aa @ AAT)
orcs em errs Fafirs (@faret)
erect (#f4e1)
And Others

ROHEL PUBLICATIONS
38/2-Ka, Banglabazar (1st Floor) Dhaka-1 100
Phone: 9580773 Mobile: 01716555580
Overall Content

Preface: iii
Chapter — 1: Purpose Planning 1
Chapter — 2: Idea Development And

Thought Planning 7
Chapter — 3: Attractive Beginning 47
Chapter —4  : Unforgettable Ending 63
Chapter — 5  : Variety (afer) 77
Chapter — 6 = Using colorful And Lively

Language 97
Chapter —7 =: Conciseness And Simplicity 113
Chapter — 8 = Directness And Clarity 125
Chapter —9 : Smooth Transition : Shiny

Flow of Thought 137
Chapter — 10: Writing The Modern Way 183
Chapter — 11: Expressing Ideas The Right

Way 203
Chapter — 12: Tone And Style 251

Chapter — 13: The Real Birth of An Essay 275

Chapter — 14: The Paragraph : The Basic
Unit of Composition 287

Chapter — 15 : The Essay 355

I- i obny few

in 1 1 jt
www. facebook. com/tanbir. ebook.

G
DETAILED

CHAPTER CONTENT

iii

Preface

1 Pivrrose PLANNING 1
A. The Purpose 3
B. Purpose Planning 4
»)) Ll DEA DEVELOPMENT AND 7
T THOUGHT PLANNING
A. How to Start Thinking 9
1. Brainstorming (Brain
Mapping) 9
2. Idea Boosters 18
3. Advanced Thinking
Techniques 21
4. Profound Idea Sources 29
5. Idea Arrangement and
Detailed Outlining 30
6. Idea Development in the
Exam Hall 37
B. Preparing the Writing Plan 38
x A TTRACTIVE BEGINNING 47
ov &
A. Attractive Beginning 49
1. The Flow of Thought : Two
Approaches 49
a. Inductive 49
b. Deductive 50
2. The Beginning Plan

a. Amusing The Reader 52
b. Surprising The Reader 52
c. Involving The Reader 52
B. The Topic Sentence and
The Beginning 54
1. Explicit Topic Sentence 55
2. Implicit Topic Sentence 56
/NEORGETTABLE ENDING 63
A. Possible Sentence
Patterns for a Nice Ending 65
B. Types of Ending 66
1. Circular Ending 67
2. Ending by Pseudo-Repetition 68
3. Ending by Reference to the
Beginning 69
4. Termination 71
5. Summary Ending 72
6. Ending by Recommendation
or Suggestion 72
7. Ending by Rythmic
Variation 73
psa Caton) 7
The Dimensions of
Variety 79
B. Variety of Words 80
C. Variety of Sentences and
Patterns 83
D. Variety of Paragraphs 94
E. Variety and The
Beginning 96
F. Variety and The Ending 96
G. Variety of Variety 96
SING COLORFUL AND

7
LIVELY LANGUAGE 5
A. Colorful And Natural
Phrases 99
B. Lively and Effective
Words 105
C. A Word of Caution 112
“ONCISENESS AND SIMPLICITY 113
A. Choosing The Right
Word 115
B. Choosing The Right
Expression 119
C. Rewriting The Whole
Sentence 123
D. A Word of Caution 124
[)rrectess ann cLariry 125
A. What's Meant by
Directness and How
Obscurity Occurs 127
B. Tactics for Writing
Directly 128
MOOTH TRANSITION : SHINY
FLOW OF THOUGHT 137
I. What's Transition 139
Il. Major Causes of
Incoherence 141
Ill. Areas Requiring
Transition 142
A. Transition Within the
Paragraph 142
1, Filling a Small Gap in the

Thought 142
2. Cutting Out Irrelevant
Words 144
3. Leveling Sentence Patterns 146
4. Using Transition Markers 149
5. Using Reference 150
B. Transition Between
Paragraphs 151
1. Backward Transition 152
2. Forward Transition 163
3. Mediate Transition 169
4. Both-Way Transition 174
5. No Use of Transition 179
6. Conclusion 182
RITING THE MODERN WAY 183
"A. Introduction 185
B. Avoiding Cliché 185
C. Avoiding Sexism 198
{XPRESSING IDEAS THE bs
RIGHT WAY
A. Expressing The Point of
View 205
B. Focusing on Something 207
C. Emphasizing 211
D. Downtoning 215
Linking Words and
Phrases 218
F. Rhetorical Ways of
Focusing or Highlighting,
Emphasizing, and
Creating Dramatic Effect 230

G. Other Ways of Focusing
and Emphasizing 248
ONE AND STYLE 251

1. TONE / ATTITUDE 253

A. What's Tone 253

B. The Three Strings of Tone 253

1, Tone toward Subject 254

2. Tone toward Reader 256

3. Tone toward Self 257

C. What Tone to Choose 258

1. Tone and Purpose 258

2. Tone and Style 258

D. How Tone Is Manifested 259

Il. STYLE 260

A. What's Style? 260

B. Levels of Style 261

1. Formal Style 261

2. Colloquial Style 266

3. Informal Style 268

C, A Comparison Table 272

D. Which Style to Choose 273

HE REAL BIRTH OF AN ESSAY = 275

A. The Plans Revisited 277
B. What this Chapter Is

About 277

C. Fine-Tuning Your
Writing : An Exhaustive

Self-Training 278

HE PARAGRAPH : THE BASIC 287
UNIT OF COMPOSITION

I. THE PARAGRAPH 289

A. What's a Paragraph 289

B. The Body of The
Paragraph 289
C. Characteristics of a Good

Paragraph 300
1. Completeness 300
2. Unity 304
3. Order 307
4. Coherence 325
D. Types of Paragraphs $25
1. Expository 326
2. Descriptive 327
3. Narrative 328
E. Topic Sentence And The

Paragraph 336

I]. PARAGRAPH
DEVELOPMENT METHODS 339
Enumeration 344
Comparison and Contrasts 345
Cause and Effect 350
Classification 351
Illustration 351
Description and Narration 352
HE ESSAY 355

A. The Beginning And The

Ending 357

B. Writing Plan Revisited 361
PURPOSE CHAPTER
PLANNING 1

He who would climb the ladder must begin
at the bottom
—Proverb
“Will you tell me please,” she said, "which
way | must go from here?”
“Yes,” said the cat, “but mustn't you tell me
where you want to go?"
“Well, any place—" Alice began.
“Then you can go any way,” the cat said.
—Lewis Carroll,
Alice in Wonderland
Knowing where you're going helps you get
there,
—Gary Fellers
@

A. The Purpose
B. Purpose Planning

A. The Purpose

“Though | don't know what | don't know,” said the magician, "I
know what | know. That's why | can entertain you the way | want
to, even if | can't do what you tell me to do.” When asked how he
could perform such strange feats, a magician told me so. It was a
very erudite comment indeed.

As with the magician, so with us. We must know where to go
before we set off. If we don't, then we'll ultimately reach nowhere.
The same rule is applicable in writing also. Nobody can write
anything without having a clear purpose in mind. Purpose,
therefore, simply means knowing what to write and why. It's only
when you know the answer to these questions can you know well
how to write. Understandbly, if you know your purpose well, your
writing will tend to be good; you'll be in a position to say what you
want to say and when what you want to say is clear to you. You
can be confident enough about how you should say it to make it
effective. Experience shows that those who write even a very
short essay without a definite purpose plan write it very badly. This
has proved true in the case of even those who know English well.
The following flaws have been most frequently observed :

@ The beginning doesn't fit well with the ending.

@ Frequent deviation from the main point occur uexpectedly
with the result that some irrelevant points or sentences
crop up.

@ The line of thought doesn't flow smoothly from the
beginning through the end.

@ The essay becomes boring and dull owing to the absence of
saying the right things the right way.

These flaws—it's obvious—are enough to fully spoil an essay, arn't
they? So, always make it a habit of saying the right thing the right
way. And you'd better not say anything at all until you clearly
know what you must say. Suppose, however, that your grammar is
appropriate, but that's not enough. Writing is much, much more
than grammatical accuracy.
Effective Writing Skills For Advanced Leamers

B. Purpose Planning

Before attempting to gather and develop ideas, you may make your
purpose plan as follows.

Output

Reader

Size

Time

PURPOSE

Tone

Style

: Essay, story, report, letter, or something

else?

Specialist/technical, student, general
(learned, not-very-educated), or
something else?

: How many sentences/paragraphs/

words?

: What's the deadline (time limit) before

which the output must be completed?

: To inform, entertain, threaten, warn,

persuade, educate, train up, or something
else?

: Given the purpose, what should be the

tone of the essay/author?
—Toward the subject?
—Toward the reader?

@ serious (#182)?

@ friendly?

@ advocative (MMé44f)

@ doubtful?

@ didactic (educative)?

@ objective?

@ emotional? etc.

: Given the purpose and tone, what style

should be followed?
@ formal?
@ informal with a formal tone?
@ informal with a colloquial tone?

®@ colloquial?

Purpose Planning 5

Strategy =: To achieve the purpose and to express the
tone, how should I arrange my thoughts
and ideas (see Idea Development and
Thought Planning)?

You can draw up such a plan more elaborately either by using
complete sentences by the way of self-direction or more concisely
in a tabular or matrix form. Whatever tactic you follow, make sure
you read your own plan several times until you become completely
familiar with your self-direction. After you've completed this plan, do
the needful for idea development prescribed in this book and then
prepare the writing plan. You'll do well if you consult these plans
over and over again during the course of your writing.

Below is shown a purpose plan written by a university student,
who, over and above ascertaining what to do, clarified in advance
whet not to do.

Topic : How our political leaders lead

Output : It will be an essay for a
newspaper.

Reader : Language, expressions, words,

terms etc. should be easy and
non-technical because it will be
written mainly for the general

public,

Size : The essay will be limited by 600
words.

Time One week

To inform the public of the tricks
that leaders play with people for
their own gain. No side will be
taken either with the ruling party
or with the opposition. Objective
judgment, but criticizing. Good
sides of leaders’ will not be
emphasized; the purpose of this

Purpose/and Scope
Style
Strategy

Idea Development

Writing plan

6 Effective Writing Skills For Advanced Leamers
Updated Bangla e-books(pdf): www.facebook.com/tanbir.ebooks

essay is to highlight the dark and
objectionable sides only. The
search will limited mainly to the
1940-1997 period, with,
however, occasional reference to
remoter history. I'll try to warn
the public as well as leaders,
persuade the public to help create
a healthy political climate.

: The subject will be considered a

oe

very important one—perhaps the
most important as far as this
country is concerned. Objective,
friendly tone; emotional at the
end, Not satirical. Unbiased.
Realistic,

informal with a formal flavor.
Show facts. Compare—present
with the past, and the leadership
practiced in this country with
that practiced in other countries
if relevant. Appeal to readers’
reason and emotion—but NOT
by biased intention.

Idea will be developed and facts
will be arranged in light of the
above objectives,

The writing plan will be made
elaborately keeping this purpose
plan in consideration. Efforts will
be made to make the essay
informative and attractive.

Having made this plan, the student then read it at least ten
times. Then he developed the necessary ideas (See CHAPTER 2 for
idea dvelopment) and made a writing plan.

All e-books & Software : www.tanbircox.blogspot.com
IDEA

DEVELOPMENT CHAPTER
AND THOUGHT

PLANNING

2

Ideas go booming through the world louder
than cannon. Thoughts are mightier than
armies.
— W. M. Paxton
Writing is thinking.
—Stephen Leacock
O° CHAPTER”
OUTLINE

@D

A. How to Start Thinking

1. Brainstorming (Brain Mapping)

2. Idea Boosters

3. Advanced Thinking Techniques

4. Profound Idea Sources

5. Idea Arrangement and Detailed Outlining
6. Idea Development in the Exam Hall

B. Preparing the Writing Plan

@

idea Development And Thought Planning 9
A. How to Start Thinking

As far as writing is concerned, the question that is most frequently
heard from people is : How to start it all? or How to get going? An
essential question it is. Most people find it rather easy to answer
when they are asked questions. But they often don't know how to
question ti Ives and set th Ives thinking. In a word, it's
very hard for them to find out the starting point. The whole of this
chapter is devoted to the exploration into various handy techniques
of both starting and continuing thinking. This is the most
important part of the writing process because you've got to know
very well what you're going to write about before you set out
writing. Everyone should, for this reason, put the most importance
on this phase of the writing activity and spend a considerable
amount of time thinking about it. And why not? If you have 15
minutes to cut a tree, wouldn't it be wiser to spend 10 minutes
sharpening the ax? Certainly, the stronger the preparation, the
better the writing. So, be well-prepared according to the
instructions given in this book before writing anything.

Besides di ing about brainst ing, the most frequently
used idea development technique, we'll discuss about some more
advanced techniques used by great writers. Those techniques have
been clearly defined, named, and elaborated by the author of this
book. Since nobody in my knowledge has yet named and defined
such advanced techniques in any formal manner, I've had to take a
humble initiative to do the same in this book. That means that the
work of a scholar has been shouldered by an audacious: and

enthusiastic tyro. For this reason I won't request you tosconsider
the terms that I've created as unch ble, but | ay t you

s reisot |

to follow the rules given in this book. They'll work!

1. Brainstorming or Brain Mapping

This is a process by which we develop the very primary ideas
about the topic at hand. It helps us generate the very basic ideas
relevant to the topic sentence. The process of generating ideas by
0 Effective Writing Skills For Advanced Leamers
Updated Bangla e-books(pdf): www.facebook.com/tanbir.ebooks
brainstorming is very simple and interesting. Just follow the

following technique.

@ Put down the topic or problem on a separate piece of paper.
Suppose you want to write on this topic : The Necessity of
Good Teachers. Then write this topic and encircle it with a pencil
in the following way.

The Necessity of
Good Teachers

@ Now start thinking about the issue in such a manner that
ideas and information flow through your head lightly and swiftly.
Don't judge what's relevant (2rf%*) and what's not. Just what
comes through the head is enough. Then record all the ideas that
come to the mind this way.

In this process, it's good to ask yourself these basic questions
about the issue :

What is it?

Who is/are relevent to the issue?

Why is it a problem?

When does the problem arise?

How does the problem arise and how to
solve it?

Where does the problem exist?

Here are the ideas that a students generated about this issue at
the brainstorming phase. (See next page)

All e-books & Software : www.tanbircox.blogspot.com
idea Deelopment And Thought Planning 11

education
necessary for life
/ for there's a need
academic for a quru
{ teaching a=
\
The Necessity
of
Good Teachers
for = 4 good actor
moral
as good teaching
teaching ability

discovers the
inner potential
of students

The student has, of course, come up with small bits of
information which drifted (are St CS AEM) through her brain.
She didn’t use her judgment; she only put down all that came
through her mind. And here's the outcome. You can easily see that
now it's possible to plan the essay with these pieces of ideas. But
they have to be arranged in an efficient order so that the overall
theme flows and develops from the beginning through the end
smoothly enough. Such arrangement is the concern of a later
section.

One point, however, should be noted : not that the pieces of
ideas the student has brainstormed are all that could be possible by
others. You may come up with more ideas. You also may.qiot like to
use some of them in your essay. So, at this stage,.9ou have to
discard (4m Gm) those ideas that you don't wantsto use in your
essay. Sometimes you are needed to do so because those ideas are
irrelevant or because you're not in a position to elaborate them or
support them by sufficient information or because the volume of the
essay doesn't allow them. Whatever the cause, you have to do it
after all available ideas have been collected.
12 Effective Writing Skills For Advanced Learners
Now let's plunge ($4 G71) into another brainstorming session.
Let's generate ideas to amplify (721% #21) the idea :
Needs can be met, greeds never.

Here, the main theme centers around two key-words : Needs
and greeds.

physical
(what needs are) Ca is it.) mental
~ greeds? / —
= social

ya
how to
\fulfill needs?

essential
vs.
fuxurious

what is greed?

the limitation

b tt
Wig ele ae of need fulfillment

be greedy?

consequences
of greed

These are in fact the ideas a student generated after receiving
some instructions. She, of course, combined later the two sets of
ideas toward more effectiveness.

A Primary Thinking Framework
The brainstorming aided by the basic WH-Questions is a
good framework of thinking. But it doesn't take into consideration
Idea Development And Thought Planning 13

the faculties of the mind from which the ideas and information
come. Hence the need for a broader primary framework of thinking
which will help to gather or extract the basic ideas needed to
develop a certain issue from the various faculties of the mind. This
framework, or model—if we can call it so, can be conveniently
identified as "I SEEK" :

< Imagination
< Search

< Experience
« Expectation
< Knowledge

zAmmwo

As a matter of fact, during the brainstorming session ideas
occur to our mind from what we know (K), what we expect or
desire to happen (E), what we've experienced or stored in our
memory through observations of the real world of our own or of
others (E), what we obtain by searching (or researching) books
magazines or other records (S), and what we creatively happen to
imagine (I) by being instigated by the combined effects of the other
faculties of the mind. Most of what you think of something is
virtually a product of these faculties. In other words, they back up
the whole thinking and idea generation process. So, we can,
instead of brainstorming without any thinking framework, take
support of this “model” to do that brainstorming. In other words,
we can combine this "model" with the WH-Questions framework
toward more effectiveness. This amalgamation will undgubtedly
enable us to invent better ideas, thereby covering many more
aspects of the issue under consideration. When yor don't have
enough time to search through records or éiks to obtain
information, such as in the exam-hall, then you have to trade off
between the "K" and the "S". More specifically, then you have to
rely solely on the Knowledge you have about the issue and avoid
the Search. But, on the other hand, you should in no way
disregard the Knowledge even if you have ample of time and
fective Writing Skills For Advanced Leamers

= Updated Bangla e- -books(pdy www. facebook.com/tanbir.ebooks
opportunity to Search. Bear in mind that creativity primarily
comes from Knowledge, and not from the Search. And it's easier
to chalk up a primary writing plan on the basis of the Knowledge
than on the basis of Search. After mapping out the primary plan
on the basis of the Knowledge you already have, however, it's
easy and productive to go for the Search to improve the plan.

Now let's

try the revised brainstorming “model” on this topic :
Any door opens to keys of gold.

Well try to amplify the theme.

Ka

E

E

Ss

Now add

What we know about the natural behavior of a lock;
normally, a lock opens only to a specific key—its own
key

Experience shows that ‘gold’ or riches (or wealth or
money) has much power; if you have money, you can
make friendship with almost all persons; with money
you can do almost anything

but we should Expect the honest and the good to be
honored, not just money; though the reality is
unfavorable, we expect that money not be worshiped
by Searching history we discover the fact that “gold”
or wealth has reigned over human mind all the time;
and truth has often been neglected and obstructed by
the mighty gold

if "gold" were not as mighty as it is seen to be, the
world would change; if truth were honored, it would
turn into gold; then we'd find gold everywhere; life
would be adorned (S4x¥S) with gold

the WH-Questions to the above "scratch plan" to

bring out more detailed ideas. You can ask questions like the
following ones :

Wo

What does “gold” refer to?
What does “door” refer to?

Answer: Here "gold" refers to wealth and “door” refers

to opportunity, happiness, power and so on.

All e-books & Software : www.tanbircox.blogspot.com
Idea Development And Thought Planning 15

Wo Why is "gold" so powerful?

Allter 2 ois 22,

Wo When is "gold" NOT effective?
or, What's gold's limitation?

IAPISVIGE. 2 | wiel: Nhroene >

Wo Where are the "gold-holders", and in most of
the cases what do they do or how do they
behave toward people?

POO nos 5 aie mares

H- How's "gold" obtained? How does gold OPEN
the "door"?

ANewWer sop 4.2 oeree

You can answer the above WH-Questions by taking help of the
| SEEK model. Once you've obtained enough information, you can
decide about which pieces of information to use and which to reject.
Such sifting activity (Cat#/C@te GAIT #18) over, you can move on to
the next phase of Idea Development called Idea Arrangement.

Idea Development Exercise

— You've chosen a topic sentence : Rather light a candle than
complaining about darkness. You want to put this sentence at
the end of the essay you are going to write, so that the ending
reveals what the main theme is. Moreover, you believe that putting
this sentence at the end will make the ending interesting. Now use
the "Il SEEK through 5W-H" brainstorming model to generate ideas

for the essay. .
OF

ANSWER Ss
A well-trained student thought the following pieces of leas would
help plan the essay well :

Facts from his Knowledge (K) :
Some people complain about misfortune; they're not active; they're
lazy; they do nothing, and so they get nothing; but they don't
blame themselves; they only blame their fate or the
social/economic system they live in

RS
16 Effective Writing Skills For Advanced Learners
Updated Bangla e-books(pdf): www.facebook.com/tanbir.ebooks
Facts from Experience

I've seen some such people who possess a negative attitude toward
luck; once | met a man who sat down under a tree waiting for a
mango; but unfortunately no mango fell on the ground the whole
day; the man blamed the tree and went off; but he didn’t even try to
pluck one from the tree

Expectation (E) :
No fruit should be expected without toil; but some people expect so;
they're foolish and get nothing

Search (S) :

History shows that those nations and people who have worked
have obtained the things they've desired: they've progressed; those
who remain idle sink under the sea of poverty

Imagination (I) :
Activity is life; inactivity is death; we'd be in our dreamland if we
worked hard.

What — what we do determines what we get or obtain

Why — __ the above explains why some are successful and some
are not

How— we're able to know how to be successful—by work and
hard work

When > when we complain about luck without doing anything,
we're foolish; we should do the right thing in the right
time

Who — __ he who's in bad luck is responsible for it

Where — such foolish people are always seen in society,
especially in Bangladesh; but people in China, Japan and
other developed countries are the opposite

From these bits of ideas and information, he then wrote out an
essay. He, however, went through some other steps of activity
All e-books & Software : www.tanbircox.blogspot.com
Idea Duelopment And Thought Planning 17
before being able to write the essay, but here we'll not look into
those steps. We postpone them till a later section. Here we present
the essay the student wrote. Read it and compare it with the ideas
developed above. You'll easily see that he had to polish the
brainstormed ideas several times before producing the ultimate
outcome—the essay.

What a man does determines what he obtains. If he, for example,
plants an apple plant, he'll never get grapes from it. Likewise, if he
plants a grape plant, he'll never get apples from it. We're the
architects of our own fate. Actually, LUCK is nothing but Labor
Under Correct Knowledge.

But, unfortunately, there are some people who are lazy. They
want their desire fulfilled without working. Consquently, they get
nothing. Yet they blame their fate without realizing that it's they
who are responsible for their poverty and failure. I remember such a
man who one day waited under a mango tree for a mango to fall on
its own. But no mangoes dropped down. At last he went away,
blaming the tree. Just after that incident I saw that a boy climed
onto the tree and tasted the sweatest mangoes happily. Then and |
there I realized what actually makes the difference between the

ful and the ful. The difference is manifested not by
what they get but by what they do. I'd like to emphasize that luck
is what happens when opportunity meets efforts. History bears
proof to this statement : nations which believe in this definition of

oO
“luck” has developed much, while those believing andbrelying on
fate have still ined underdeveloped. Now they should ask
themselves : Why are we unsuccessful? And I'd tell them both as

an answer and an advice : Rather light a candle than complaining
about darkness.

i

4 y he ‘ag 4 +f os Lis Ty, y} e
www. Facebook. com/tanbir. ebooks
8 Effective Writing Skills For Advonced Learners
Updated Bangla e-books(pdf): www.facebook.com/tanbir.ebooks  ,

This is, to be sure, a good piece of writing. But it can still be
improved and made better. Then, that better version can also be
made better. In fact, there is nothing as superlative in the world of
writing. What's only true-is that there's always an opportunity for
you to be a better writer. If that's the reality, why don't you try?
You'll sure break the record someday!

Back to the main point, we're discussing about idea developing
techniques, and so far we've discussed two techniques. Both these
techniques require you to depend much on your spontaneous
mental reaction or creativity. They're good, no doubt, but not
hundred percent reliable. They would work better if they were
supported by another deterministic ffamework of thinking. The
following few sections present such a framework.

2. The Idea Boosters

If your topic is too general (such as “Population Problem of
Bangladesh"), you have the liberty to think about many aspects of
it (such as nature, causes, remedies etc.). But if the topic is specific
(such as—"Ignorance is the Main Cause of the Population Problem
of Our Country"), then your thinking must be limited, narrow, and
more specific. In the latter case, the essay may be argumentative
or analytical, ie, expository; see CHAPTER-14). Normally,
different types of ideas are required to write different types of
essays. For this reason, if we memorize in advance some major
question types or idea boosters, they'll help us to think in the
most deterministic way. For a one-term, general topic, you may
have to answer some or all of the following questions.

It's Implication? (suggested meaning)
It's Definition? (what?)
It's Origin? (Occasion) (How?)
It's Causes? (Why?)
It's Effects? (What?)
It's Merits/Importance? (Why?)
It's Demerits? (What?)
It's Remedies? (How?)
All e-books & Software : www.tanbircox.blogspot.com
Idea Dvelopment And Thought Planning 19

It's Abilities? (Capabilities) (What?)
It's Characteristics? (What?)
What's your Suggestion?

Not that other questions are not relevant, but these are the
major ones you must ask about a general/open issue. Rember that
all the questions may not be relevant to a certain issue.

If, on the other hand, the topic contains more than one key-
term and is specific, then the following major questions must be
asked about it to discover the necessary ideas.

Are they Dependent on each other?
What are their major Differences?
What other Factors are relevant to each?

Over and above these questions, you must ask the former
questions about each term too.

Now let's see some examples. Suppose you've been asked to
write an essay on this topic—

The Green Revolution.
Then the following information about it will be necessary.

D—Definition
O—Origin

M—Merits (Importance)
S—Suggesion

The three points can be elaborated to fill up three or more
paragraphs. In the definition part something should hesSaid to
clarify what the Green Revolution is. In the origin part Should be
stated how this concept came into being. In the merits part you
can elaborate the revolution’s good sides, itstontribution to
various sectors of the economy, and so on. Then you can make
suggestions about how to make it a success. If you use the above
\deas to construct an essay, and if you draw up a good beginning
ond an attractive ending, then there's every possibility that the
essay will be a very good one.
20 Effective Writing Skills For Advanced Leamers

Now another example. Suppose you're provided with the
following issue :

A Little Pot Gets Soon Hot

and are asked to amplify the idea implied in it. How will you develop
the ideas?

It's clear that the statement indirectly refers to some reality in
the human world. So the first "I" of our framework is relevant here.
The following may help to plan the piece of writing.

| — What does the statement imply (SIt4 qc)?
Causes — What are the causes of a little pot's getting soon
hot?

Since there is an implied comparioson between a little pot
getting hot and the uneducated or untrained mind getting angry or
ecstatic (SeIf¥s BafFS) too soon, the first D of the DDF framework
is also applicable here.

D — the heat capacity of something is Dependent on its size
(and density—¥4); the strength and calmness of a mind
is Dependent on its level of education, training etc.

Now you apply the "I-SEEK through 5W-H" model on these
ideas to obtain more detailed and specific ideas. Below are presented
the ideas generated by a well-trained student.

I- by Imagination | try to understand what the
statement implies; it's clear the statement refers to
the human mind and temperament (C7=Te)

K — I Know these things : the smaller and the less
educated a man's mind, the sooner he gets angry or
unreasonably joyful; as a result he changes too often;
he can't have a good personality
Idea Dvelopment And Thought Planning 21

E-— the statement is true : I've got proof of it through
the Experience of my past days

E— people are Expected not to be too “hot” or too "coid”;
they should no longer remain "little pots”

S— mental and emotional exercise is Suggested to “cure”
such “diseases”

From these pieces of ideas he then made an outline (to be
discussed later in this chapter) and then wrote an essay from the
outline. We'll see later that the order and content of ideas in the
outline need not necessarily be the same as in the brainstormed
ideas.

3. Advanced Thinking Techniques

There are some topics to write on which you have to think
critically—very critically. Normally, we can decide about what to
say about something by the methods discussed so far, but the
techniques that will be discussed now are very helpful for thinking
more critically about a topic. Though these techniques don't cover
‘all thinking areas of a topic, they pinpoint some dark areas of a
subject and help to discover small, precious bits of ideas. Not that
these techniques are always helpful. So, apply them keeping this
point in mind.

By Reversing the Relationship of Two Terms : You. can
generate attractive—and most of the time creative—ideas by this
<

method. The process is simply this : &

c=)
Ss

Usual relationship : e

preposition
or
TERM—1 + prepositionalf * TERM—2
phrase

$2 Effective Writing Skills For Advanced Learners

' The new idea-producing relationship is as follows :

preposition

TERM—2 + + TERM—1

or
prepositional
phrase

Suppose you say this sentence :
RCS GAS A CAT SA |
This is a normal expression; that is, we normally say or use in
writings such expressions. And there’s nothing new in it. But if you
just change the relationship between the two bold-faced terms
(ais4 and Gil 4144), then you discover something new as
follows :
CM Sea GAS BI BS)
Now think over the implied meaning of this expression. This
process can help you create such fascinating expressions as :
“GIA BCS GIA Fis4—S Se SRST?”

A very enticing question—@ #1 Sasa? Is the 2S the Base of
the Gita #144 or the Gila 4144 the Weta of the Ber Such a
dramatic question puts the 2 in a highlighted, superior position so
that we look more at the 81 than at the Gare |

A man asked a monk this question :

Can | SMOKE while PRAYING?

The monk, after thinking a while, reproached (S€#™1 #20474) him
saying, "You're wrong in the way you've asked the question.
That's not the right question. So, the answer won't be correct.
The question should have been asked like this :

Can | PRAY while SMOKING?"

See how creative and critical the latter question is? It's just a
matter of changing the order or relationship of the two main
terms, and that makes all the difference. Interesting indeed!

See more examples :

A man was buying some liquid milk from a milkman. Seeing that
the milk looked too diluted ($4), he asked him :
Idea Dvelopment And Thought Planning 23

coma bt f& anf core qe, atfe yx Cotte aR?

(Is it milk in water or water in milk?)

At this question the milkman was shockingly surprised, because it
was actually water in milk.

As you've observed, wording thoughts in this way helps you to
throw light upon both sides of an idea. You can make experiments
with ideas with this technique so that something unseen and
attractive pops out. So, it's wise to try this technique at the idea
development phase.

Now look at both sides of each of the following expressions.

1. (a) a cat without a grin (=f)
(b) a grin without a cat

2. (a) aman without eyes
(b) eyes without a man
3. (a) dogs biting men
(b) men biting dogs

4. (a) ideas without words (thought, imagination, feelings)
(b) words without ideas (nonsense talk)

5. (a) knowledge without experience
(b) experience without knowledge

6. (a) sleep without dream
(b) dream without sleep
ie
’ 7. {a) live to eat - ra
(b) eat to live &

8. (a) live to love
(b) love to live

"I've seen a cat without a grin, but I've never seen a grin
without a cat."
— Lewis Carroll, Alice in Wonderland
24 Effective Writing Skills For Advanced Learners
We often see men without eyes, but that day | saw two eyes
without the man. |t was a ghost ($8).
You've heard about dogs biting men, but have you ever heard
about men biting dogs?

Ideas without words are useful, but words without ideas are
not effective at all.

Knowledge without experience is of little use. and
experience without knowledge is often dangerous, because it
creates begotry (cgi).

Sleep without dream is good for you, but dream without
sleep is not. It's, on the other hand, harmful.
Remember that we don't live to eat; we eat to live.

Live to love and love to live well.

Now observe the difference between each pair of the following
questions or statements.

@ Can | gossip while studying?
@ Can | study while gossipping?

@ ort fea wrasa areir
@ afe ore are) trans fear

@ When we're afraid, we're angry.
@ But when we're angry, we're not afraid.

@ oft wm eH aw Ne aT
Bo See TH he Bl MEH SACS CA |

@ Don't believe what they tell you —
@ and don't tell them what you believe.

@ "The way to avoid mistakes is to gain experience.
@ And the way to gain experience is to make mistakes.”
Idea Dvelopment And Thought Plarming 25

When, however, there is a cause-and-effect relationship
between the things represented by the two terms, you can
experiment it (ie, the relationship) by changing (ie, reversing) their
order. This process may help you discover some new fact.
Consider the following examples.

Normal: We weep because we're afraid.
Reverse : We're (more) afraid because we weep.

Normal: We see the world because it exists.

Reverse : The world exists because we see it.

Normal:  Starcma aH CE’ BTS AAR

Reverse :  Stwal afta 4'cy STaIeHa HHH CAS
[ = ores ofa acre ora sta) |

Normal: When you're happy you laugh.

Reverse : When you laugh you're (more) happy.

Normal: He has lost will-power because he is a habitual
drunkard.

Reverse : He is a habitual drunkard because he has lost
will-power.

In fact, both the statements in each pair have some amount of
truth.

By Placing Opposite Ideas Side by Side : According to this
method, identify the key-words to be used to express an idea and
write them on a piece of paper. Then write other words which are
opposite or nearly opposite to them or which seem 1 to be
contradictory to them just before or after each of theth. Then
think about the phrase comprising these apparently | contradictory
words. Often you'll discover that they together make a new and
interesting sense, though they're opposite to each other. If you
come up with a meaning, try to improve it. Hopefully, a collection of
such phrases hammered out to describe a subject is a good source
of innovative ideas. The following examples will enable you to
understand the process.
Effective Writing Skills For Advanced Learners
Updated Bangla e-books(pdf): www.facebook.com/tanbir.ebooks
Suppose you're going to write a short essay on the feeling you

had when you met your love the first day. The topic is assigned to
you as follows :

“wre Ae eee fio” —a@ fararrcs Pres area a afee afore)
retires ata aq | “Sra” Save earea Srerace Zac Sears |

The first thing that you should do is generate ideas by
brainstorming and. express them using only one word in each case.
Suppose the following words are produced in this regard.

aft -fafrra
Aaew)
‘aT

way (aT)

Then use each of these words separately to. launch experiments
on them in the following manner.

yaa + SafR af
a + aes
wet + SIS
faery + aa

How do the above phrases look? How do they read? How do
they smell? Nice, no? All the phrases are meaningful in a certain
way. They give you new insights, feelings, and inspirations. Make
as many such phrases as you can and use them in your essay. But
make sure you use them properly and meaningfully.

Here are some more examples. See how the following words
have been turned into beautiful phrases.

busy > idly busy
earnings > — unearned earnings (Safes ar)
fool = leamed fool (PIFFS cate!)
All e-books & Software : www.tanbircox.blogspot.com
idea Deelopment And Thought Planning 27

danger > favorable danger (Sai faem)

joy> dangerous joy or, harmful joy
pleasure > painful pleasure
gay > grimly gay

punishment — pleasing punishment (Swe 1%)
madness > planned madness, harmonious madness

glory = destructive glory

fame > ignominous fame (F41teers Far)
evil = necessary evil

idleness active idleness

thrill pleasing thrill

You can also make expressions or sentences using
contradictory (ufc) words or phrases in them to create such
beautiful" meanings. For example, "cruelty" and "kindness" are two
opposite ideas, but they can be used in a single sentence toward a
subtle (7) meaning. Here it is :

“| want to be cruel only to be kind.”
Now see these examples too :

Silence is i mere eloquent (@1&78) than words.
FPA SN Bs GSA WAS BAA |

This is the real beginning of the end.

Consider the child in the old man.

— What are you doing?

« Taking rest.

-— How come? You are walking.

» When I'm tired of sitting idle, | take rest in walking
Cheapest goods are costliest. Ro

| defeated her by surrendering to her. =
Revenge yourself by forgiving your enemy.

(Fata Gal efeenty are |)

“4 -waTOHa BT CAH GE STH 1”

“I AH Se ATH AT |”

“TR GOR SH, STO Sea 1”

28 Effective Writing Skills For Advanced Learners
Updated Bangla e-books(pdf): www.facebook.com/tanbir.ebooks

“A good t is one who makes herself unnecessary to
her pupils.”

Afflict me with pains of love.

A woman becomes sorry for two things : because she doesn't
have a nice face, and because she has.

“Your enemy is your best friend.”

She killed him little by little.

The more haste, the less speed.

Make haste slowly.

The fact that he exerts power on everybody proves that he’s
not powerful at al} : he has no power over himself.

You've spoilt the child by love.

By Analogy : You can also generate ideas by likening something
to something else. When you're thinking about an abstract idea,
you may find it convenient and helpful to think about it by
comparing it to something concrete and easily comprehensible.
Thus you can express one in terms of the other. You may, for
example, like to describe the solar system with a view to describing
the structure of the atom to the general public. Again, for your as
well as the reader's convenience, you may want = seats the
mind to the sea to indicate to its it or See
these lines by Rabindranath :

“6 @ Aa ore BA
CHIR BA, CHT FH
fre ary ar Bel

wata zen fem |”

Here the poet has looked upon the S¥% in terms of the huge,
endless #34 which is implied. In every case where the point under
consideration is complex, you can fall back on (S47 Gera a1 crew Hrearg
iu) this kind of imagination. In fact, we can call it “thinking by
imagination”.

All e-books & Software : www.tanbircox.blogspot.com
Idea Development And Thought Planning 29
4. Profound Idea Sources

Once you've chosen the topic, you can develop the required
ideas according to the need. If, for example, the topic is complex
enough, then you may have to search through books, magazines,
other published records and so on. Actually, the sources of ideas
depend mainly on two factors :

~ The complexity of the topic, and the time available to finish
the piece of writing.

For this reason few can definitely say from what sources they
should gather ideas—books, articles, records, surveys, or
imagination. But one thing can be said for sure: Whatever the
nature of the topic and whatever you're going to write (except
poetry, songs etc.), you have to use the brainstorming technique in
the beginning. After you've gathered the primary ideas about the
topic, you can decide whether to search through books, or articles,
or other things, and if so, then what type of books articles etc. to
search through. This way you can gather more ideas, At this
stage, however, you may have to change and modify your writing
plan once or more than once. So we see that brainstorming is a
must. And we've also discussed some techniques to be used to make
the brainstorming process more effective. Now we're going to
discuss another technique which can make it even more effective. In
fact, this a very effective technique of idea generation. Good
writers all over the world use it consciously or unconsciously. The
process is simply this : &

x

ys)
wa

6 Put down the topic clearly.

Identify the key-words of it.

6 For each key-word, look up as many QUOTATIONS as
seem interesting from one or many books (of quotations or
other reference books).

‘® In the same manner, gather as many PROVERBS as you
like on the idea from one or many books of proverb.
30 Effective Writing Skills For Advanced Learners
Updated Bangla e-books(pdf): www.facebook.com/tanbir.ebooks
» low arrange and re-arrange the quotations and

proverbs in a proper way and develop your ideas from
them.

6 Identify those quotati and p bs that you want to
use intact in your writing and change the others into
meaningful outlines.

Quotations and proverbs on a certain theme are very good
sources of ideas on that theme. They provide you with precious
pieces of ideas and illuminations. They throw light upon many
aspects of the theme. Someti it so happens that these proverbs
and quotations provide you with very valuable bits of ideas which
you could not think out without taking help from them. You can
make a comprehensive outline from them. Also, you can use some
of them in your writing to add spice and flavor and color to the
expressions. In fact, well-chosen quotations and proverbs make
good beginnings and endings of a paragraph or article.

Others’ opinions are also a good source of ideas.

Besides being used for idea development, proverbs and
quotations can, as has already been said, be very fruitfully used—

@ at the beginning and/or ending of each chapter of books;
@ at the beginning and/or ending of important paragraphs of
any piece of writing; and

@ amidst sentences of an article or essay.

However, you can get the best out of quotations and proverbs
by combining this technique with the other brainstorming
techniques discussed earlier. We'll see examples later on in this
chapter.

5. Idea Arrangement and Detailed Outlining
Brainstorming is a creative process of idea generation. Since
creative processes don't maintain any order, ideas in that process
pop out inharmoniously. At this stage, therefore, you've to do the
following :
All e-books & Software : www.tanbircox.blogspot.com
Idea Development And Thought Planning 31

@ Sort out necessary ideas and reject the others.

@ Combine two or more pieces of ideas into one group if
necessary.

@ Arrange them one after another in the order as they will
appear in the essay.

@ Make an outline of the topic and the sub-topics.

These points are concisely summarized as follows :

“

We'll see the whole process by way of an example. A well-
trained student was given the following topic and she generated
ideas and passed through all the above steps.

The Pen is Mightier
than the Sword.

All she did with this topic is as follows :

Purpose : Idea amplification.
Implied Sense (Sr4) ; Brain power is greater than muscle power.
Brainstorming :
o
(1) types of power and human ability Ss

(2) human life versus (447) muscle power and byain power
(3) good and bad sides of these types of power

(4) relationship between them

(5) example from history

(6) growing importance of brain power in the modern age
(7) cause of the insufficiency of muscle power
32 Effective Writing Skills For Advanced Learners

Idea sorting and rejecting :
No point is rejected except point (3).

Idea combination :
Points (1) and (2) should be combined. Points (6) and (7) should be
combined into one.

Idea arrangement :
In writing, the points should appear in the following order :

(©+®@)+© (1 +@© )-®©

Beginning and Ending plan :
[| To be discussed later on in another chapter]
conclsion should come at the end. The approach will be inductive.

Outlining
» Since the passage will be a small one, it will contain no explicit
headings/captions. The idea of each paragraph or section will be
diffused into it.
Here's the essay that she wrote. She, however, made a writing
plan which we're not producing here.

All through our life we create and use many types of power such as
body strenth, political power, official authority, mind power,
intelligence and so on. We can classify these in two main classes :
brain power and muscle power. We virtually depend on all these
types of power to win in life. We need certain types of power to
win in certain stages of life. It must be mentioned in this regard
that these two types of power—brain power and muscle power—
were part and parcel of each other in the primitive ages. In those
times brain power could not be exerted without the help of muscle
power and muscle power had little value without brain power.
Idea Dvelopment And Thought Planning 33

Yet muscle power have proved to be of very temporary
importance over ages. As we look through history, we can see the
rise and fall of civili
discoveries, the progress of science, economics. philosophy and

ations, the emergence of inventions and

other branches of knowledge, which all have been possible owing
mainly to brain power.

Time has changed. much. Man's life and environment have
become more complex. In this age of complexity, intelligence has
all but altogether substituted muscle power and physical strength.
The whole infrastructure of man's civilization stands on the huge
basement of knowledge, philosoply, and experience. Now
anything—whether good or bad—should be done by the power of
knowledge if it is to be done perfectly. There is every evidence to
believe that the pen is mightier than the sword. A pen in a learned

man's hand can fight thousands of swords in people's hands.

The student was not allowed to revise or edit the above
writing. In view of this fact it can be said that she has written well.
However, one mistake she’s made. While in her plan she wrote that
she would arrange points in (7 + 6) > order, she actually
wrote these points in this order : 6) >(7 +6).

Now we'll see another example.

The Bad Sides of] ©
Power. Ls
Ss
<

A student was instructed to write a short essay on this topic. He
did the following.

Purpose : an essay in less than fifteen paragraphs.
Brainstorming :

EWS—3
4 Effective Writing Skills For Advanced Learners
Updated Bangla e-books(pdf): www.facebook.com/tanbir.ebooks
the

powerless
tend to be exploited @
and belligerent definition

role in
human civilization (2)

4

constructive power (3)
go Kaiten Dr mermetoren

@

Wegener just @

tend to dominate bance se

n Coma Lene
ond © selfish ©

_-f government @

me

eligion ©
uty @ individual ©
excessive x Ne power to
owes wrong people

Idea sorting & rejecting :
Point Nos. (2) and (3) should not be elaborated because the purpose
is to write only on the bad sides of power. A brief referene,
however, should be made to the points in the introduction.
Idea combination :
Points (4), (5), and (6) should be combined, but they may be
discussed in several different paragraphs.
Idea arrangement (strategy) :
The points should be discussed in the following order.
(A) definition and its role in human civilization
(point (3) omitted)
(B) the behavior of a man in power may be just, unjust,
selfish; powerful man tend to dominate
(C) but power corrupts—government and other systems,
individual
(D) why power corrupts
(E) on the powerless : they tend to be exploited and then
become belligerent (a1#at=1)
All e-books & Software : www.tanbircox.blogspot.com
lea Development And Thought Planning 35
Outlining :

Introduction (A)

The Man in Power (B)
Power corrupts (C)
(Why). -. . = (D)
The Powerless (E)
Conclusion

Relevant quotations & proverbs :

© 1: A friend in power is a friend lost. —Henry Adams
© 2 : Power tends to corrupt and absolute power corrupts
absolutely. —Lord Action
FP 1: Might is right.
() 3; The wrong people are always in power because if they were
not the wrong ones, they would not be in power,
—Jon Wynne-Tyson
( 4 : Patience and gentleness is power—Leigh Hunt
( 5 : Power is ever stealing from the many to the few.
—Wendell Phillips
() 6 : He who has great power should use it lightly.
() 7 : Power is difficult to define but easy to identify.
—Helga Drummond

The writing plan (to be discussed later) :

Introduction : [a] paragraph; Q7, (A)

The Man in Power : | 1 | paragraph; Q1, (B) Kal

Power Corrupts : [2] paragraphs: first paragraph :
Q2s"'P1 "(Ch second paragraph
(why) Q5, Q3

The Powerless : [1] paragraph: (E)

Conclusion : Q6.

The notations Ql, Q2, Pl etc. refer to the quotations and
proverbls),
Effective Writing Skills For Advanced Learners
36 dated Bangla e-books(pdf): www.facebook.com/tanbir.ebooks
Taking help from this plan, the student wrote the following

essay. He however, didn't use any caption (fcaTa).

"Power is difficult to define but easy to identify.” When we see
something done or some achievement, we can easily infer that there
was some power behind it. In simple terms we can say that power
is the ability to do something or make others do something. This
implies that no great deed can be done without power. But,
unfortunately, the reverse is also true : that all the harms and
destructions done to the world are due mainly to power. That is,
power has some bad sides too.

Power doesn't exist without a person or system, So, it's best
to analyze it in terms of its relation with its holder. When, for
example, a person is in power, he or she can't but use it That
person may be just or unjust or selfish, and the exercise of power
by him or her will go accordingly. Most of all, power tends to
instigate and intoxicate the ill-wills of a person. Most of the time
the power-holder becomes selfish and dominating. Virtually, even
the closest friend. when in power, looks down upon a person as his
or her enemy. “A friend in power is a friend lost" is a truism.

“Power tends to corrupt and absolute power corrupts
absolutely"—this is the experience of history. When men assume
power, they realize who they are and forget who they were, and
don't consider who others are. Then "Might is right" becomes their
leading principle. C ly, the gi i
social systems—all tend to get corrupted.

4 eS

But why does power corrupt? It's a very easy question to
answer but perhaps the most difficult problem to solve. There are
some evident reasons. In most of the cases, “Power is ever stealing
from the many to the few". Man's selfishness and greed are the root
of it all. Again, power corrupts the most when it goes to the
wrong people. And it’s our bitter experience that “The wrong

All e-books & Software : www.tanbircox.blogspot.com
idea Development And Thought Planning 37

people are always in power because if they were not the wrong
ones, they would not be in power". This is because power itself’ is
earned in a corrupted way in most of the cases, Consequently, it
goes only to those who are corrupted, Excessive power and power
to wrong people—both are dangerous and destructive.

Surprisingly, power also corrupts the powerless. The
powerless, having been exploited and tortured by the powerful,
make both legal and illegal attempts to gain power, which
ultimately result in power-play and more destruction. At that stage,
power tempts all—the powerful and the powerless.

Power destroys, no doubt, but without it nothing constructive
can be possible. Hence it's a necessary evil. All we can say to the
powerful is that "He who has great power should use it lightly”

As you've already seen, this essay is a good one, though it
could be made better if more space were allowed. Such a topic
actually needs a bigger essay to be more fully elaborated.

6. Idea Development in the Exam Hall

In the exam-hall, the limitation of time discourages you to
elaborately plan the ideas as well as the writing. Yet, you have to
plan. That sort of plan will necessarily be different from the one
made for other purposes. In the exam-hall, just do the following.

@ Generate ideas by brainstorming.
Sf
x

@ Keep necessary ideas and reject the others. e
@ Re-arrange or order the ideas as you think proper”
@ Identify the logical flow of thought; ve noories or
deductive [see CHAPTER 3]. s
Make an outline by giving each idea/point a head or caption
(sub-topic name)

@ Write against each sub-topic how many paragraphs you'll
write on it.
38 Effective Writing Skills For Advanced Learners
gg Bangla e-books(pdf): www.facebook.com/tanbir.ebooks
Write down separately the quotations and/or proverbs you

want to use in specific paragraphs.

@ Plan an attractive beginning and a good ending [see
CHAPTERS 3 and 4]

@ Start writing the essay according to the plan. Use other
writing techniques given all through this book.

In this connection always remember one thing : you have to
acquire writing skills by going through the whole content of this
book and practicing according to the instructions given in it. The
essay in the exam-hall will require you to spend at best a period of
one hour, but a preparation of at least one year.

And it's only when all the techniques of this book come to your
mind spontaneously (757¥ESIt4) and effectively can you be sure
that you'll write well, however short the essay is. Writing skills are
required to write even a short paragraph, let alone essays, reports,
letters, or books. So practice the whole book as often as possible.

B. Preparing The Writing Plan

Once you've developed or generated necessary ideas on a specific
topic, you've to prepare a writing plan before starting writing. The
writing plan is the real beginning of a piece of writing. No matter by
whatever method you develop your ideas, the writing plan is a
must. It's necessary even in the exam-hall, let alone at home or at
office when you prepare for a report, letter, research article, or
book. The plan can be a very simple one or a comprehensive and
long one. Such a plan helps you flow your thoughts from the brain
through your pen. It helps your memory. It ensures a better and
more skillful writing. The writing plan includes a number of steps of
activity. Look at the following list.
All e-books & Software : www.tanbircox.blogspot.com
idea Deelopment And Thought Planning 39

The Idea Arrangement and Detailed Outlining phase over, start
the writing plan as follows.

>
>

>

Make an Outline in points and sub-points.

Write mgakint ach Point and bana tai the number
of p d to d p it.

Write the Transition Plan (see NOTE below): EB (End to
Beginning) or BE (Beginning to End), etc.

Make a list of Quotations and Proverbs, if any, and
specify which one is to be used in the discussion of
which point or sub-point.

Decide about the type of Beginning and Ending (to be
discussed in the relevant chapters). You may use the
following notations :

Beginner/Terminator (Ending) :

nQ* for Question

"RQ" for Rhetorical Question

"EX" for Exclamation

"Ss" for Generalized Statement
"PS? for Particular Statement
"QTN" for Quotation

“PRO” for Proverb

"ANS" for Answer (including Yes/No)
“REPET’ for Repetition

"ANEC" for a short story or Anecdote
"JOKE" for a Joke

40 Effective Whiting Skills For Advanced Leamers
Updated Bangla e-books(pdf): www,facebook.com/tanbir.ebooks
For convenience and for saving valuable time, you can use a lil

the following table.

The Writing Plan

All e-books & Software : www.tanbircox.blogspot.com
Idea Development And Thought Planning 4

As we advance, however, we'll modify this plan so that
eventually we come up with a better one.

NOTE :

Transition will elaborately be disussed in the relevant chapter,
but, for your convenience it's briefly discussed here.

Transition is the flow of thought or logic from a paragraph
into the subsequent one. If two paragraphs are placed one after
another and both are different and there is no commonness
between them, then these paragraphs are not well-written; they
don't both refer to an overall theme. In fact, paragraphs should be
such that after reading the first one it can be inferred what will be
said in the next one, or, conversely, after reading the second one it
can be inferred what was said in the previous paragraph. See the
fall 3, two 2.

3 e hel

Our belief controls our emotion, Most of the time we react to the
reality the way we perceive it, and we perceive it the way we
believe it exists. C quently, our sp mental reaction,
or emotion, is much governed by our belief. Se

Our physical condition controls—better say influences-our
emotion. The body influences the mind, the perception, 3 andl as such
the way we react. So, when the body changes. our getiction to the
reality also changes.

Read the first paragraph putting something over the second so
that you can't see it. Does the first paragraph lead you to the
second? Does it imply that there is another paragraph next? No.
Effective Writing Skills For Advanced Learners
42 dated Bangla e-books(pdf): www.facebook.com/tanbir.ebooks
Now read the second paragraph with the first one covered with a

book. Does the second paragraph imply that there is another
paragraph above it? No. Then, to be sure, they aren't good or well-
written paragraphs. The thought or theme doesn't flow smoothly
through them. Now read the next version of the paragraphs.

Among other factors, our belief controls our emotion. Most
of the time we react to the reality the way we perceive it, and we
perceive it the way we believe it exists. Consequently, our
spontaneous mental reaction, or emotion, is much governed by our
belief. In this regard we must also consider the

sae

of our physical dition on our emotion.
Our physical condition controls—better say influences—our
emotion. The body influences the mind, the perception, and as such
the way we react, So, when the body changes, our reaction to the
reality also changes.

Now after reading the first paragraph you can infer what will be
said in the next paragraph. The last sentence of the first paragraph
makes this transition possible. It tells you what the next paragraph
will begin with. This type of transition can be called "forward
transition" or End-to-Beginning transition. But still the second
paragraph can't tell you what was said in the previous paragraph.
So, for another version of the paragraphs. This time the first
paragraph has not been changed, but the second has been.

Our belief controls our emotion, Most of the time we react to the
reality the way we perceive it, and we perceive it the way we
believe it exists. C ly, our

|

p mental reaction,
or emotion, is much governed by our belief.

(Like our belief) Our physical condition also controls—
better say influences—our emotion. The body influences the mind,
the perception, and as such the way we react. So, when the body
changes. our reaction to the reality also changes.

All e-books & Software : www.tanbircox.blogspot.com
Idea Development And Thought Planning 43

The phrase “Like our belief” at the beginning of the second
paragraph clearly reminds us that sc hing was said about our
"belief in the previous paragraph. We can also omit this phrase,
because the word "also'' is sufficient to remind us that another
factor of our emotion was mentioned in the previous paragraph.
This phrase and this word both make the transition possible. This
kind of transition can be called "back d tr ition" or
Beginning-to-End transition. In your writing, you may use any one
of them. Later on we'll see how many ways are there to make such
transitions effective.

We'll now look over a writing plan made by a university student.

The Necessity of Good
Education in Our
Country

Purpose : To write a long essay; informative [Purpose plan is not
reproduced here]

Brainstorming :
What's Good Education
What's Bad Education
Why Good Education

The present education system of this country SS
Its merits &
Its drawbacks Ss

What to do to make it effective
good infrastructure
(school, college, institute)
good curriculum

pragmatic
multidisciplinary
Effective Writing Skills For Advanced Leamers

Updated Bangla e-books(pdf): www.facebook.com/tanbir.ebooks
To keep pace with the rest of the world

To build up an enjoyable society of fraternity
To build up an active nation
Overall suggestion

Others’ opinion

My opinion

Idea Arrangement, Combination and Outlining

The student combined various pieces of ideas as follows.

Ml.

What's Good Education and Bad Education

Why Good Education

A.— To keep pace with the world
B.— To build up an enjoyable society of fraternity
C.—_ To build up an active nation
(political consciousness, economy, activeness
etc.)

The Present Education System

A.— Merits

B.— Drawbacks

C.— How to Make it Effective (others’ opinion and
my opinion)

(1), — Good Infrastructure
(2). Good curriculum

(a). — pragmatic
(b). — multidisciplinary

(3). well-trained teachers

IV. Overall Suggestion

All e-books & Software : www.tanbircox.blogspot.com
Idea Development And Thought Planning 45
Relevant quotations and proverbs

Q1: Education is what survives when what has been learnt has
been forgotten.

— B-F. Skinner
Q 2 : Education is the backbone of a nation .
Q 3: A good teacher is one who makes himself unnecessary to his
pupils.
Q 4 : Rather light a candle than complaining about darkness.
Q 5 : Knowledge is a treasure, but practice is the key to it.
Q 6: A journey of a thousand miles begins with a single step.
Q7 : The best way to have a dream fulfilled is to wake up.

Research findings and scholarly comments made by others

F 1: A man's gentleness and good manners are positively related
with his level of education.
F 2 : Education or knowledge is the foundation of the economy,
not wealth or manpower.

Tables
Table showing the present literacy condition in detail (not produced

here). -
The writing plan is produced in the next page. +
46 Effective Writing Skills For Advanced Learners
Updated Bangla © DOO Se elo cOlT a0 ebooks

Now if you start writing the essay from the above plan, you'll
need the necessary information which has not been presented
here. Yet, why don't you try it? Write the essay on your own.
While doing so, keep in mind the “I SEEK” model of thinking. You'll
have to fall back on your Imagination, Experience, Knowledge and
Expectation to obtain the necessary information.

All e-books & Software : www.tanbircox.blogspot.com
ATTRACTIVE
BEGINNING

CHAPTER

3

Well begun is half done.
— Horace
The first impression lasts the longest.
—Proverb
OUTLINE

@

A. Attractive Beginning
1. The Flow of Thought : Two Approaches
a. Inductive
b. Deductive

2. The Beginning Plan
a. Amusing The Reader
b. Surprising The Reader
c. Involving The Reader

B. The Topic Sentence and The Beginning
1. Explicit Topic Sentence
2. Implicit Topic Sentence

@

Mtractive Beginning 49
A. Attractive Beginning

As the morning shows the day, so the beginning of your essay
shows how it will develop. If the beginning of your writing is not
attractive, it will not impress the reader, however much attractive it
is in the latter part. Most readers just read the beginning of a piece
of writing to decide whether to continue with it or not.
Consequently, if the beginning attracts them, they continue
reading the essay with enthusiasm; if it doesn’t attract them, they
say goodbye to it. So, when you write something—l mean,
anything—you must take it up as a challenge with the prospective
reader.

What should be done to make the beginning attractive, then?—
you might ask. That's what this chapter is about. But before
discussing the techniques in detail, we must study the two major
approaches of presenting the thought.

1. The Flow of Thought : Two Approaches

If the essay you'll write is analytical or argumentative
(expository—see CHAPTER-14), then it will contain arguments and
conclusions. Such essays can be organized, broadly speaking, in
two ways. In one, the conclusion is stated first and then proofs are
given. This is called the direct or deductive approach. In the
other, specific examples or proofs are given, and then the
conclusion follows. This is called the indirect or inductive
approach. The approach of thought presentation may influence
the selection of the type of beginning. For this reason, we edt to
understand these two approaches very clearly. >
a. Inductive| As you've already known, in the indvctivk flow of
thought, the conclusion is drawn at the end of the essay. The
essay, obviously, begins with examples or specific proofs or pieces
of supportive information. The organization of the essay may be
schematically shown as follows.

iws—4
Effective Writing Skills For Advanced Learners
-facebook.com/tanbir.ebooks

specific examples —
a oar : beginning

more examples
and

arguments : development
idea development

/ conclusion/generalization a end

Suppose you want to say this :
Dre era GT “Ses aA Sara Gora GZ |

but you don't want to say this directly; rather, first you want to
give specific examples supporting this opinion of yours. If you say
this thing in this way, then you are said to follow the inductive
approach. The paragraph may be as follows :

FST a cece Cafaca Bey Ucar AAC NAS Maa? STH aS WT
Wifeen aeTe are | STH ces AA CRAs WARS USB GA | GTA My
COTS FA AVIA CWA, Sie aT | Dies Sora Grea ze Bay cofaa
fay sface fara | erence fica Ht feecane Baraca ote care area
es ca citer | face ara-erd snide carn Gre ycaICS FA | eH
RH WIA | RHIAN Gara Tea BE Use Sfernfrenesre are ctrerey
ARIE DATE BI CATA es eR AE aif GI SNS TEA AS DATA
Grs-cofSe Was SPP SSS A | CAAT AIC CHATS PAT |
Dre Mara Bra “fers SAH Sara Gora Zs

If, on the other hand, you want to state the
general opinion or observation first and then support it by specific
examples, explanation, or proof, then you'll have to follow the
deductive approach. The fundamental and simplified structure of a
deductive essay can be shown as follows :

All e-books & Software : www.tanbircox.blogspot.com
Mtractive Beginning 51

\ Generalization fr» beginning

rting examples,
explanation etc. > development

Reference to or
repetition of the ending
beginning

For example, written in this way, the above paragraph would be
as follows.

bret eee Sts “Bre ara wars Beta A safe fe mca? saa
Ire | aes wa care cafaen Ofer aaa Face TS meee sae
Ce TS MSA raw Bea | AEH cece APN CFATA AIMS FE GeTyy |
ora fe connec aa aay cra, Sie aa) Eee er areata Fe
Brea-Ofea fy siren fica) arenca fen H feacear garacara eet
caret aa aes caf citer | afice eral-ere snfea caren ara gras
AVA | WU TH VCH GNC | BaTale VITA Fea BS arswS are ctrergie aq-
Bia DATE, Sl CHCA ATH BE AE fem SIEM Sere eR one be)
S-CofSe Sa SP RPRSA Aes AA) CHA AIA OTST PT |
fren =ifece aera?

What ever approach you follow, you can vary your beginning

+
and closing in many ways. &
x
<

2. The Beginning Plan &

How you should begin your essay depends oad you want
to attract the reader, what your tone should be, and what style
you'll follow. Sometimes you may have to go through a trial-and-
error process to determine which type of beginning suits best a
specific essay. We'll now see how many ways are there to begin an
essay. Broadly speaking, you can attractively begin your essay by :
52 Effective Writing Skills For Advanced Learners
poke fincit\ wasn foal falanWitela) a\la=] g16lo)-¢-)

La | amusing the reader

|b | surprising the reader, and
| | involving the reader.

Obviously, amusing the readers means giving them pleasure by
saying something they will most probably like. However, you have
to think out what type of reader will like what type of sentence.
Again, it may depend on the nature of the topic and the tone.

You can surprise the readers by telling them something that
they don't know but are likely to like. It may be an apparently
contradictory statement—an epigram or oxymoron (See
CHAPTER-11). It may be a completely new thought or invention.
It may also be a shocking or unexpected piece of information.

You can involve the readers by saying something about them
or inviting them directly in some way, This technique allows you to
take the readers as your partners in the writing activity.

There are some sentence types or modes of beginning which
are widely used to amuse, surprise, and involve the reader. They are
as follows.

All e-books & Software : www.tanbircox.blogspot.com
\ractive Beginning 53

Now we'll see some examples. Observe the beginning of the
following passages.

Things may not be judged by their apearances. If we don't use our
objective judgment, our eyes may fail to see the actual worth of
something. For example, often we come across commodities in the
market which look good but give little utility. Most eye-cathing,
brightly colored furniture is made of unseasoned, cheap wood. The
artificial diamond dazzles the eye with its fake brightness. Even
this statement is true of people too. The boy who looks oversmart
is virtually good for nothing. Enticingly-dressed-up girls seldom
behave well. Everywhere we see things in pretentious disguise.
Who knows what is genuine and what is ersatz? All that glitters is
not gold.

The above piece of writing has begun with generalized

gati tat its. (It also ends with such a generalized
statement. So, the approach is neither inductive nor deductive. It's
pseudo-repetitive.) Such a beginning surprises the readers because
\| expresses something unusual.

"What to do now? I'm frightened! The bear is coming near!" said
the man who could not climb trees to the man who could. The
later, seeing that danger was imminent, ran away and climbed ong
a nearby tree without considering what would happen to his fiend.
His friend, finding no other way, lay down on the grounds if he
were dead. The bear came and, smelling the man, thought he was
dead and went away. The danger over, the first man came down
from the tree and asked the second, "Friend, what did the bear tell
you?" "Friend!" the second man exclaimed, "What's called a friend?”

Actually, who is a real friend? This question will set anybody
thinking.
Effective Writing Skills For Advanced Learners
PA pated Bangla e-books(pdf): www.facebook.com/tanbir.ebooks
Everything can be judged, and so it should, And so should a

friend too. Success has many friends. But they are only fair-weather

friends, not real. A friend, says Plato, is a single soul living in two

bodies. If this is the definition of friends, then anybody can not

claim to be a fraind. On the contrary, one who helps his friend in

danger is a real friend. That is, friendship should be tested by the

touchstone of sorrows and happiness. As a matter of fact, a friend

in need is a friend indeed.

The beginning of the above passage is a very short story.
Such a beginning is both ing and surprising. The second
“paragraph also involves the reader by posing a question.

What is character?—is a very old question, and yet very
difficult to answer. Normally we mean by character a set of
behavior representing truthfulness, kindness, considerateness, and
innocence. But behavior is a set of visible activities it may not
represent a person's true inner being. A person may try to appear
fair while he or she is not really so. This paradoxical fact
necessitates us to include another element in the definition of
character. A man will reveal his true character when he is allowed
to do whatever he wishes. A very rich man may not be a thief at
present, but do we know for sure that he would not steal if he were
utterly poor? Likewise, a beggar who looks very gentle and soft
might be a tyrant if he were a king. Man's true character is revealed
when he has ample of opportunity to do anything he wishes. Or, if
a man is sure that nobody can see what he does, then most
probably he will do what he likes by nature. The proverb rightly
says : Your character is what you do in the dark.

This paragraph began by a question which was meant to
involve the reader. Also look at the ending sentence. This very
sentence could also be used as the beginning sentence. In that case
the idea arrangement of the whole paragraph would have to be
changed.

B. The Topic Sentence and the Beginning
Every paragraph has a unique idea to deal with, and so does every

essay or passage. While the idea of a passage or essay is called the
All e-books & Software : www.tanbircox.blogspot.com
Miractive Beginning 55

theme or the universal theme, that of each paragraph within
that essay may be called a sub-theme or local theme. Such
themes can be explicit (W) in the essay in a sentence, or they can
be implied (S¥*). In a passage the thought of which is arranged
deductively or directly, the topic sentence, if not implied, appears
at the beginning. In an inductive essay, however, the topic
sentence, if not implied, appears at the end. In this regard it should
be remembered that it's not always necessary to explicitly express
the topic sentence, wherever it be placed. Nor is it necessary to
place the topic sentence at the beginning or end; it may appear
anywhere in the essay.

1. Explicit Topic Sentence

Where does a baby look the nicest? In its mother's lap. And where
do the animals look the most beautiful? Surely in the jungle. We
may encage (%em wren) a bird out of joy and with a view to
enjoying its beauty and song, but after some days it will lose all
its attractiveness. Then the bird flying at large up in the sky will
look better than that encaged one. People are seldom presented with
wild flowers by their beloveds. Why? Perhaps they don't consider
wild flowers beautiful when they are brought home. But it's
surprising to see how eagerly people look at them in the
wilderness. This is because wild flowers are beautiful in where they
bloom, A beautiful woman will not look beautiful in the dirty
boisterous factory, but in the flower garden she will. Similarly, a
young stout-bodied man will not look nice when he is working in
the kitchen. After all, everything has its own place.

OF
The topic sentence of the above passage is: . . . everything
has its own place. Surprisingly, the whole passage suggests the
theme, and so even if the topic sentence were not explicitly stated,
it could be guessed easily. s

Haste makes waste, as I have experienced in my life. Many
examples can he gathered in support of this statement.

I remember once meeting a man who was bundling up his
accessories in a hotel room. He was trying to work so swiftly that
56 Effective Writing Skills For Advanced Learners
Updated Bangla e-books(pdf): www.facebook.com/tanbir.ebooks
he seemed to be in a hurry. When asked why he was being so busy,

he said that he must catch the train which would leave after one
hour. "Why so hurry? You've ample of time." | assured him. But
he would not listen to me. Then I told him, "O. K., make haste
slowly." Yet he was being busier and busier, While bundling his
articles, he broke some glass wares. As soon as he started moving,
he remembered his towel and tooth brush being left out. Then he
took them but could not keep them in the brief case because he
could not remember where he had kept the key. Then. after much
searching and rummaging, he found the key under the pillow. Then
again he was about to set off when he reached for the train ticket,
but it was not there. "My ticket! My ticket!" he muttered to
himself worriedly. At last he found it in his purse. Then he set off.

After half an hour he came back, panting and sweating from
head to foot. "What's wrong again?” I asked him. He said that he
had missed the train. Had he not made haste, he would not have
missed the train, Now he suffured much—a waste of time and
money.

The topic sentence of this passage is this part of the first sentence
: Haste makes waste.

2. Implicit Topic Sentence

Why do you want to choose? Haven't I given you one? Look man,
you're not buying it, nor are you paying for it in any way, are you?
So, you can't be so particular (feds) about it, Just take which one
I've given you. If you don't like it, keep it back here and go. But
please don't try to choose,

Which is the topic sentence of this paragraph? None. It's
implied, and not stated. It’s this : Beggars can not be choosers.
You could use it at the end of the paragraph.

Some Interesting Beginnings
Now let me present you with some interesting beginnings.
@ How would you like to make money from writing and
become moderately famous and respected?
All e-books & Software : www.tanbircox.blogspot.com
Vineetive Beginning 57

How would you like to do this without the worry of character
development, with a ready-made foolproof plot, and not even have
to provide a happy ending?

Finally, how would you like to have an army of unpaid
helpers throughout the country (perhaps internationally) urging
readers to buy your books?

You would? Well, so did L And I achieved it by writing my
first textbook in co-operation with a professional istician. It
became a bestseller. It has sold steadily for nearly 20 years; over
70,000 copies to date; netting me well over $20,000 at current

prices.
—Derek Gregory
Observe how the author puts a series of questions to—
attract
involve, and

thus attack
the reader. In the fourth paragraph he presents a tempting
information. A nice—very nice—beginning.

Ever thought of writing a pantomime? Now is the time
of year that amateur drama groups begin scouring French's
catalogue for something suitable for a Christmas production. Many
will be disappointed.

— Jackie Short
® Writing comedy for television and radio falls into two
categories : character comedy and joke comedy. Briefly, joke
comedy is the sort you find in sketch shows such as The Two
Ronnies, Spitting Image, Weekending, etc., where the point is to
create a short sketch with a funny tag. I worked in this genre during
the early 70s on a variety of shows, mainly for Radio 2 and Radio
4, and found it a hard task mistress for the followi g.48asons
: PS

a
aim Eldridge
The writer plunges direct into the subject. It's also an attractive
beginning because the subject itself is attractive.

Whatever you write, be it fiction or non-fiction, drama or

verse, there is one essential. As the popular song says, "You've
gotta have . . . style.”
58 Effective Writing Skills For Advanced Learners
Updated Bangla e-books(pdf): www.facebook.com/tanbir.ebooks
But what is style? Writing style is .. . really, whatever works,
A writer may adjust his/her style to the needs of a particular
project, but the basic, underlying style is likely to remain, It is
likely that each writer's style is unique to each individual.
— Gordon Wells

A beginning which directly addresses the reader. The author
comes up with a question—every writer's (here reader's) question—
and with its answer.

Rosalind said, ‘Men are April when they woo, December
when they wed."

I thought, ‘Nice, Nicely put’.

What was so good about it?

The metaphor.

Although many people might not know precisely why some
people’s talk is so striking or attractive, and still fewer would be
able to recognise a metaphor as such (far less define what a
metaphor is), I think it is true metaphor, is one of the major
elements at the heart of striking speech or writing.

— Jim Mcintosh

Virtually, the whole portion quoted here is the beginning.
Attractive. Because it not only starts with a striking comment but
contains the author's appreciation (“Nice, Nicely put.”) which
actually attracts the reader's appreciation too.

© Fed up of not getting the breaks? Ever feel junk gets
published while your best work earns rejection slips? Are you
positive your writing's excellent but, due to the countless rejection
slips, you're beginning to lose faith in your abilities?
— Martin Horan
A series of questions. Colloquial style.
So you'd like to write for magazines and newspapers?
Good. It’s a great occupation. If you will work at it you will surely
succeed. There is always room for another new writer.
—Gordon Wells
in the Introduction of a book titled

"The Craft of Writing Articles".
All e-books & Software : www.tanbircox.blogspot.com
Mtractive Beginning

59

Clearly, the beginning paragraph not only asks the reader an
attractive question but also appreciates and encourages him or her.
A really persuasive and provoking beginning.

Here is an amazing fact : One family in every 100 has a
net worth of $1 million or more. Today there are almost a million
millionaires!

Meanwhile, countless people in tess-than-wealthy
circumstances ask, "What must I do to acquire more money and
enjoy the lifestyle that comes with it? How can I achieve greater
happiness, prosperity. and satisfaction in my life?”

— Dr. David J. Schwartz

The very first clause—Here is an 'amazing' fact—together
with the information that follows can't but amaze the reader. This
is the beginning of the perface of the author's best-selling book
"The Magic of Thinking Success."

©) The strategy of the following beginning is that the author

makes the reader face some problems which, understandably, the
reader himself or herself eagerly wants to get solved, and then he
promises that he'll give the solution. An enticing strategy (#4)
known as “Part of the problem, part of the solution” strategy.
Also notice how the author puts single sentences in individual

, haci

for

v

You probably believe your thinking is pretty good—most

people do.
Or, you may believe that nothing can be done about your
thinking. &

Or, you may believe that trying to improve sour thinking
skill would be complicated and borning.
Improving your thinking skill is actually ach much simpler
than most people believe. That is what this book is about.
— Edward de Bono,
in Author's Note of his book
“de Bona’s Thinking Course.”
60 Effective Writing Skills For Advanced Leamers
Updatgal Bangla e-books(pdf): www.facebook.com/tanbir.ebooks
We firmly believe in the fact that over ninety percent of

us are not destined to do great things. And in each one of us we
have a hidden desire to do great things. What to do?

We have found a better way which we want to share with you.
We get our inspiration from what has been said wisely. ". . . each
one of us cannot do great things! But surely, each one of us can do
small, small things greatly.”

No angel will come to whisper in your ears to create history!
We will have to listen to our own drum beat and get going.
Interested?
If so, well, here is a mini-collection of such wonderful
“whispers.” that surely will become "music” to your eyes and ears
and you will be able to influence your own “history"—instead of
merely observing it.
— Promod Batra.
in the preface of a book
The whole preface is the beginning of or the gateway to the
book. It attracts the reader toward the interior of the mysterious
palace of the book.

Billions of dollars have been wasted on marketing
programs that couldn't possibly work, no matter how clever or
brilliant. Or how big the budgets.

Many managers assume that a well-designed, well cuted

well-financed marketing program will work. It's not necessarily so.
And you don’t have to look further than IBM, General Motors, and
Sears, Roebuck to find examples.

— All Ries and Jack Troat

The book is on marketing management. So, it will easily attract
those who have already spent ‘billions of dollars’ to no effect,
because the authors then promise to give effective solutions.

All e-books & Software : www.tanbircox.blogspot.com
Wractive Beginning 61

(©) This is a book about what happens to people when they
are overwhelmed by change. It is about the ways in which we
adapt—or fail to adapt—to the future.

Much has been written about the future. Yet, fe the most
part, books about the world to come sound a harsh metallic note.
These pages, by contrast, concern themselves with the "soft" or
human side of tomorrow. Moreover, they concern themselves with
the steps by which we are likely to reach tomorrow. They deal with
common, everyday matters—the products we buy and discard, the
places we leave behind, the corporations we inhabit, the people
who pass at an ever faster clip through our lives. The future of
friendship and family life is probed. Strange new subcultures and
life styles are investigated, along with an array of other subjects
from politics and playgrounds to skydiving and sex.

—Alvin Toffler
Such goes the beginning of the Introduction of the author's
worldwide best-selling book “Future Shock." The writer attracts
the reader by directly saying what the book is about. Such a
beginning is effective—as in this case—when the subject is either
attractive or important.

(©) Here's another very nice beginning of a book. The title is
"How To Talk So People Listen." The author, Sonya Hamlin,
begins the book by introducing herself as follows :

Hellow, I'm Sonya Hamlin.
How can a book about communicating begin from anywhere
else?

st
es:

"6

~~
s :
SS
Well, you don't know me. Because we can't seetiich other—a
sense that could give you the first fast layer of information—I'll
have to unfold our relationship and go through the common order
of developing trust through words alone.
Effective Writing Skills For Advanced Learners
PF Updated Bangla e-books(pdf): www.facebook.com/tanbinebooks
Now—have we drawn closer? What have you learned so far?

@ This is a rather unusual way to begin a book.
@ She writes in a very personal, informal style (says “you”
and "me" and “I'll,” not “one” or “they” or “people’).

It's interesting to notice how the author herself comments
about her own plan of beginning. Later, again, she, on behalf of her
reader, criticizes the beginning.

@ The following is a beginning of a book titled "How to Get
Whatever You Want." The beginning fairly suits the purpose.

You were born to succeed!

Success is Nature's Law.

Success is a natural instinct. Everything in nature has a
success instinct.

Plants instinctively seek and obtain the nourishment, moisture
and all of the elements needed for successful growth. If it were not
for the success instinct, there would be no plants.

Animals instinctively seek and obtain food, water, mates.
Without their success instinct to GET WHAT THEY WANT, there
would be no animals.

People, being more highly developed than plants and animals,
have a much more highly developed success instinct. They are born
with this natural success instinct, the urge, the drive to GET
WHAT THEY WANT.

© The following captivating paragraph occurs at the
beginning of the introduction of a book on mind control by José
Silva. After reading it, it's hard not to proceed further.

You are now setting out on one of the most transforming
adventures of your life. Each result you achieve will change your
view of yourself and of the world you were born into,

All e-books & Software : www.tanbircox.blogspot.com
CHAPTER

UNFORGETTABLE
ENDING 4
Biss
In my end is my beginning.
— T. S. Eliot
OTS BENS SSA OTe |
— saree
All's well that ends well.
— Proverb
ot
&
s
\\ CHAPTER
OUTLINE

@D

A. Possible Sentence Patterns for
a Nice Ending.

B. Types of Ending

. Ciecular Ending

. Ending by Pseudo-Repetition

. Ending by Reference to the

Beginning

. Termination

. Summary Ending

. Ending by Recommendation or

Suggestion

Ending by Rythmic Variation

Daw wne

a

@

( nforgettable Ending 65

The beginning of an essay, as we've known, shoud be attractive
enough so that the reader, having read the first sentence, can't but
go through the whole essay. Readers are not only to be attracted,
but "attacked" too. As with the beginning, so with the ending. But,
perhaps, the ending should be more attractive. It must be
unforgettable. If the beginning should “attack” the readers, the
ending shoud "wound" them. What good is an essay or story or
any other piece of writing if it doesn't leave an impression on the
mind of the readers after the've finished reading it? When your
essay ends, the reader begins to think. If the ending fails to set the
reader thinking, it's not a good ending indeed. And you certainly
want to end your writing unforgettaby. don't you? Then the rest
of this chapter will give you hope. .

A. Possibe Sentence Patterns for a Nice
Ending.
later on in this chapter we'll see how many ways are there to end
or close essays, reports, stories. letters etc. unforgettably. But
whatever the ending type, you can use a wide range of sentence
patterns to make that type of ending effective. So, it wil be
convenient for you if you know at first how many sentence
patterns you can use in any type of ending. Normaly, attractive
and impressive endings are constructed with the following types of
sentences (like the beginning) :

tWs—5
earners
ebooks

We'll use some of these sentence patterns in ending the essays
we'll present in this chapter. You can also try the ending of an
essay you've written with all of them one by one to choose the
best pattern. Not that all these patterns aways suit a specific
essay; rather, some patterns suit some kinds of essays the most.
Often the ending sentence patern is chosen in light of the
sentence pattern used at the beginning. However, in most cases
it's a trial-and-error process ; that is, you should make experiments
with various types of sentence patterns to ultimately come up with
the apparently best pattern. In choosing the "best" pattern, keep
an eye on —

the beginning

the tone, and

the style

of the essay. And remember : different essays may end with
different sentence patterns. So, while writing anything, keep the
above checklist before you.

B. Types of Ending

When clearly and minutely analyzed, some types of ending can be
identified. They can be termed as follows.

All e-books & Software : www.tanbircox.blogspot.com
Unforgettable Ending 67

Let me repeat, each type of closing can successfully be effected
by one or more sentence patterns stated earlier. Now we'll discuss
them all one by one.

1. Circular Ending

It's just like a circle—going back to where you began.
Especially, essays in which ideas are arranged deductively (see the
previous chapter) end in such a pattern. In this type of ending, as
has already been said, you end the essay by saying the same or a
similar thing that you said to begin it. See the following example.

Man is mortal. How have we known
this? By observation. All the people in
all the ages earlier have died. Not a
single person has been seen to have
escaped death. Many people are
coming to earth every day. But
nobody is living for ever. Based on
this observation, we infer that people
who will be born in the future will die
— > too. So, man is certainly mortal.

circular-statement

In the above paragraph, the first sentence has been repeated in
the last place. The writer comes back to where he began. This is an
example of circular ending.

Sometimes the ending may repeat a sentence or an expression
used earlier at the beginning or at the end of a previous paragraph.

This is also called circular ending. See the following example. i;
roo)

x

AIR CH fem DEA, BAI SA SU A, ATHY SIC MT FAA | IS GH
fared RICE ATA Fea, fico Faure FC coTesTE wa AIC ATA ea
vier ace baa, Ge 4 fe fare arahl OF | ~~

UM «2 Sar Cr eats eat Gey BITE) wala ae OT za
cacafen, cee afkTs Uta ae-gfea aes CH ae OTeN fice Ficafer,
waa seni Gaeta Tey WH Be os fer Ca FTA BITS ATH
wars aprfecen | fereatbra araterabr coat: foeera fica faery cacy
aifteca Beater OF | CHE CIC WA ATIC AS BF |
68 Effective Writing Skills For Advanced Learners

GOA SHE FEA CHE CH) CITA aNyaTs CH afeer bea HaI-
Carer Ara ABTA AUCH 1 AS CAC CH ITA ARTA ACA YA AST

aainn ae 308 fi Bo | CIA CHE HB, BITE oe FATA |
Aeq Aaa aUfreb] Powe saa CH—CHA Ved fe aera aT fag
SI Wea Sys wa fea saa | oF a CO GTA AeTA-cTAy
SMT AL, MSI AAPA | acs Grea wa fe! Pome CH Tea TT
Be crt ag ore fear Sra: fog ale: Aira ara ard
waeTa AS MCS cla | Gs SIRS HV AgifA oa APA Aiea
are ae ferent cra Fa fra | Gla ATA com | CH Desa Salve
FE CAA A |

Observe the repetition of “wi ae ae feet. . . a1 |" in the above
passage. Normally such ending is often seen in poems and stories.

2. Ending by Pseudo-Repetition

This type of ending is very similar to the circular ending except
for the fact that while in the circular ending one or more sentences
or words are repeated as they appeared before, in the pseudo-
repetitive ending something said earlier is repeated, but not word
for word ; only the idea is repeated, and not the words. See the
following example.

If one develops a will-power to do something, one
will be able to do it someday or other. Maybe at present a
man does not know how to do something, but eventually he will
come up with a way to do it. In fact, intention to do something is
the birthplace of an action. Nobody knows anything by magic.

They must undergo a trial and error process to find out an effective
way to do something. Perseverence is always rewarded. Actions
never fail ; what fails is only inactive dream. Robert bruce, for
example, having failed several times to defeat his enemies, was at
last able to win over them by tough perseverence. Sir Issak
Newton recovered by hard labor the data he lost when his pet dog
Tom set the records to fire. History abounds in examples showing
great men's success after repeated trial. In our daily life too we see
Unforgettable Ending 69

that. however hard a thing is. we can do it if we just keep on
trying. Indeed, where there is a will there is a way.

Notice that the first sentence of the above passage says what
the last sentence says. They both express the same idea, though
the words are different. This is an example of pseudo-repetitive
ending. It's, in fact. a variation of the circular ending.

3. Ending by Reference to The Beginning

Sometimes, especially when the passage is very short, the
circular or pseudo-repetitive ending may both look and sound
awkward. Repeating something in the same paragraph or passage
may sometimes may indicate an weakness of writing. In such cases
a slight or brief reference can be made to the beginning. Ending the
essay in such a way can be termed referential ending. This
technique, in the hand of an experienced writer, may prove to be a
very effective one. The reference can be made in various ways such
as by J

a question,

an affirmative statement,

a negative statement.

a proposal to the reader,
and so on. However, a reference by a question seems to be very
effective and appealing. Here's an example.

Black will take no other hue—goes the saying. And it is a
fact. indeed, People who have bad designs in their minds must
fulfill them. They may, however, be controlled and suppressed for
some time, but that is temporary. A thief—who is a thief by greed
and not by need—may be punished for committing theft jean he
may give up stealing for fear of punishment. But who will change
his mind? He will still at least dream of stealing. Agieedy officer
will always try to take bribe—be it for a legal or an illegal work.
Generally speaking, the man who makes a mistake willingly will
most probably continue to do so over and over again. We can stop
someone doing something, but we can not stop him thinking.
Both good and bad exist in man's mind. And as long as he does not
70 Effective Writing Skills For Advanced Learners
Updated Bangla e-books(pdf): www.facebook.com/tanbir.ebooks
eraze out the bad from his mind, he can not stop doing bad things.

But very few people can change their minds. After all, can a
leopard change its spots?

In the above passage, the last question does nothing but
remind the reader of the first (beginning) sentence. In other words,
the last question has been used to refer to the beginning. Such an
ending is normally used in short argumentative passages in which
you've already given your opinion at the beginning. Let's see
another example.

The customer is always right—they say, And it is true as a
day.

Suppose you are a manufacturer of some consumer goods. You
have marketed a line of cosmetic products but they do not sell
good. You then ask your engineers to check the quality of the
products, They are quality products—your engineers assure you.
But why do they not sell?—you ask yourself, Then your marketing
manager advises you to launch a market survey to identify what the
customers really want. And it was done. The findings of the survey
informed you that the customers want variation in color, odor, size,
and price. But if you want to lower the price you can not maintain
the quality. So, you at last decided not to bring about that change,
since you are obsessed with quality. Instead, you spent a lot more
in advertising. Yet the sales did not go higher.

“We're here to produce what the customers want us to produce,
and not what we want to", said your research manager. “Our goal is
to satisfy the customer and thus make profits", he added. You
argued with yourself a lot and at last accepted the customers’
opinion.

Much to your surprise, you found that the goods were selling
good, though the quality was poor now. So what? You got what
you wanted—the profits!

Now think, who is right—you or the customer?

The last question of the above passage reminds you of the
beginning : The ti is always right. It's a good ending, at
least as far as this passage is concerned.

All e-books & Software : www.tanbircox.blogspot.com

(njorgettable Ending 71

4. Termination
Sometimes the ending is made by saying “So that is the end of
_ .” This type of ending is not attractive, however. But it is often
used in fairy tales, stories for children. public speeches, and personal
letters. The following or similar expressions are used in such an
ending.

You can also signal the termination by some terminal words
and phrases such as :

and so on. Now let's seerari example.
Effective Writing Skills For Advanced Leamers
? Updated Bangla e- panna le www. facebook.com/tanbir.ebooks
An Ideal Teacher

The ideal of a thing is often a theoretical concept. and rare in
reality. Yet we must pursue it to advance toward more and more
perfection. In this sense. everything has an ideal at its top. And so
has teachership. An ideal teacher is one who is not only
knowledgeable, sincere. farsighted, and self-taught, but also very
dear to students, He must know how to discover the treasure hidden
inside the students and help to develop it. In giving the teaching.
he must be an actor and an innovator. He must have penetrating
insight and immense knowledge of education psychology. He
should be wise enough to teach students how they can teach
themselves. He must. frankly speaking. know well what he knows
and what he does not know. Unlike other ordinary teachers. he
should train up his students so that they no longer have to depend
on teachers. Finally, an ideal teacher is one who makes himself
unnecessary to his pupils.

5. Summary Ending

This type of ending is mainly seen in long reports. research
papers, and other long expository essays. Chapters of books
may also end with a brief summary. The summary may come under
a head like this :

Summary, or
Chapter Summary.

Where such headings are not used, some signal words or
phrases are used such as :

To sum up, ...

To speak briefly... .

To express it all in a nutshell... .
Let me summarize by saying that...

6. Ending by Recommendation or Suggestion
Normally, research articles or reports end with a
recommendation or suggestion. Such suggestions are made by the
writer in light of the findings stated earlier in the report or article.
Such suggestions can come under a special heading, or they may
All e-books & Software : www.tanbircox.blogspot.com
Ciforgettable Ending 73

be incorporated in one or more separate paragraphs. In the latter
case phrases like these ones are often used :
In’ light of the above findings/discussions,
we suggest that...
), wer d that...
We suggest three ways to solve the problem. First ...

7. Ending by Rythmic Variation

It's a very good and natural way of ending an essay or story
or novel. According to this technique, the rythm (®#) of the
sentences is slowed down. or in some cases. varied. Before
entering into elaborate discussion. let's see an example

ne

To solve the pr

SAS AAR AY DATS aN | ITS Sere wears cre Preece COTA
TR | CF SEM els fare ye Sra cheb ree) ye! fae ad |
ainda feria Head SETS SAS] SRT | OMT CH TS | OF Se corera fire
STS A) | PGT STSTA ia Bre ate Fewa corre Bre gferca frre |

Suppose this is the last paragraph of a story. The paragraph as
produced above doesn't signal the flavor of ending. You could
rearrange the words in it to make it representative of a natural
ending. You could change either the whole paragraph or the last
one or two sentences. But since the story consists of several
paragraphs, you would do well to use the whole paragraph as an
ending. The paragraph could be altered (*fa4e9 a1) as follows :

CAs AA BATS AAR | Tears Sea ears cre fare CST
ee | Se ala fare qa sta aco are oT goes fae a3 |
wrda fear Uda CTS STS! SRN | CORA TS 1 Sa OH crete frre
sine al: | Sista Wiaicacamieiel oMabiad. satay
SHAT CMRI | &

These sentence patterns now indicate a natural ending As you
qo through this paragraph. you slide down a slope afr rythm little by
little to the climax (ending point). Your perception (848fS) becomes
softer and softer as you move toward the end. Notice the poetic
rythm of this expression :

SS RA AA IFS CT,

aia Cee |
74 Eftective Writing Skills For Advanced Leamers
Updated Bangla e-books(pdf): www.facebook.com/tanbir.ebooks
This last expression gives you a feeling as if you were going down

a hill step by step.
Let's analyze another example.
foe cong ora are frais, A CZ PLA TIS SAA | Ted SAA SYA
ae 1 Grae face casera ca aieieas fare ares | wife ofa Sire STs CHR
CTA AL | HE LOTR, CH STs Cote firm fiers em aT

Does the last sentence give you the melancholy (fear7az) flavor
of an ending? As far as | am concerned, | don't like this ending. It's
not emotive, nor is it impressive. But read the following version.

fe a ore wa wet freafea, or CHE ome Ua SH Saat | Tara GA
Oya Ae | Stare faen oreery cH oneieaa fare aR) Mite va Ts
Bl AT CNR A | CRE CTR, CTT frm fieca om AT STA

Look : the last clause has been rearranged. Also, the word “cA”
has been omitted to make the clause suitable to be read in one
rythmic breath. Obviously, the main technique lies in —

@ inversion (80 7!) of word order (“4%
td
@ dercreasing the number of words in the last
sentence or clause, or phrase; and
@ breaking the last t (s) into smaller
parts, if possible.

But one thing you must remember : Don't overwork this
technique. Excess of techniques destroys art. Most of all, use
this technique only to mark the end of the essay or story.

Now you might wonder what types of sentences help us
bring about such rythmic variation or sloping. Here are some
rhetorical devices that help you write an impressive ending. [See
CHAPTER 11]

Climax
Anti-Climax
Epistrophe
Hyperbaton
Polysyndeton
Chiasmus
All e-books & Software : www.tanbircox.blogspot.com
( nforgettable Ending 75

The following examples will show how these rhetorical devices
can be used to polish the ending smoothly.

The dictionary definition of altruism is unselfishness—caring for
others’ good before one's own, And a person with altruism is an
altruist, [tis a sad reality that altruistic persons are very rare on
earth. Most of the people we interact with in our daily round are
selfish and greedy. But majority does not always count, Goodness
is always good. The real good is never vilified by the bad : on the
contrary, they tend to be better, And that is why, hopefully, there
are sull altruistic people in the world, Whatever they do, they do
for the well-being of others. History proudly holds up the
biographies of such people. Such people are really very strange
human beings. Mundane (#f@@) hapy hardly ever attracts
them, yet they even lay down their lives for other people's

mundane as well as spiritual well-being. They think for people and
work for them. Surprisingly cnough, they do not expect any
return, The altruism of, for example, Hazrat Muhammad (Sm),
Mother Teresa, Florence Nightingle, Karl Marx, Lenin, Jesus
Christ, Newton and such other people is unbelievable. The purport
of their teachings is : If you want to be a real man, be an
altruist.

Now observe the litte change that has been made in the
following version of the above passage. Especially. notice how the
following version ends. Which ending is better—the former or the
lollowing? The revised ending is an example of Climax.

The dictionary definition of altruism is unselfishness—earing fi
others’ good before one's own, And a person with altruigeets an
altruist. It is a sad reality that altruistic persons are vest rare on
earth. Most of the people we interact with in our daily round are
selfish and greedy. But majority does not always count. Goodness
is always good. And the real good are never vilified by the bad :
on the contrary, they tend to be better. And that is why, hopefully,
there are still altruistic people in the world. Whatever they do, they
do for the well-being of others, History proudly holds up the
76 Effective Writing Skills For Advanced Leamers
Updated Bangla e-books(pdf): www.facebook.com/tanbir.ebooks
biographies of such people. They are really very strange human
beings. Mundane happiness hardly ever attracts—or better say
attacks—them, yet they even lay down their lives for other
people's mundane as well as spiritual well-being. They think
for people; they dream for people ; they work for
people. Surprisingly enough. they do not expect any return. The
altruism of. for example. Hazrat Muhammad (Sm), Mother Teresa.
Florence Nightingle, Karl Marx, Lenin. Jesus Christ. Newton and
such other people is unbelievable! The purport of their teachings is
:to be happy in life, become a good spouse; to be
influential in social life, be a good neighbor or
leader; but to be a real human being, be an altruist.

Because “we must love one another or dic”.

"God did not want to create all men ; that is why He created
mothers." And mothers have been giving birth to other men,
including other mothers. If we think backward in the reverse way,
we can conclude that the whole mankind emerged from one mother.
So we can easily assume that anybody we come accross any lime is
our brother or sister. Although remote, we all have blood
connection with one another. So, does it look nice if we consider
only our co-uterine (#24) ones our brothers and sisters? Of
course not. All people—at least those living in the same society —
are brothers or sisters to one another. Treating people as such is
called fraternity. [Cis fraternity that can tie up people in one group
and make them live in a vast social family as though they were
members of it. Fraternity makes us happy and can keep us
united for ever.

The above paragraph is a well-written one, but its ending could
be made smoother and more rythmic if it were replaced by: . . . and
for ever can it keep us united. This is, as you already know
(See CHAPTER 11), an example of Hyperbaton. Read the passage
again keeping in mind this revised ending. How does it sound?

All e-books & Software : www.tanbircox.blogspot.com
VARIETY CHAPTER
( Cafoay ) ie

Variety's the very spice of life,
That gives it all its flavour
— Cowper, The Task
It takes all sorts to make a world
— Proverb
CHAPTER
OUTLINE

A. The Dimensions of Variety

B. Variety of Words

C. Variety of Sentences and Patterns
D. Variety of Paragraphs

E. Variety and The Beginning

F. Variety and The Ending

G. Variety of Variety

WWW.

fy

JO

r

vd D vd
aceooox.com/tanvir.
A. The Dimensions of Variety

Can you eat the same food everyday? Do you wear the same kind
of dress all the time? Or suppose you're very fond of songs. Do
you like to listen to the same or same kind of songs all the time?
Most probably not. Man needs variety—variety in most things.
Even one's most coveted thing, once achieved, becomes old to one.
Nothing—however good or desirable it is—remains always new. It
becomes a source of monotony (£@t"tzf%) and boredom when it
becomes too frequent. Likewise, your writing may appear
monotonous to the reader if you use the same or similar words,
patterns, mood, or devices, (C#™™) all over. However well you've
developed your idea, however accurate the flow of logic or thought
through the essay, that essay will not fascinate the reader for long
if you fail to produce variety in it. So, you have to deliberately
produce variety in your writing. But how?

Before knowing how to produce variety in writing, we need to
know what it is and what its bases are. Variety is simply variations
or changes of something so that it can't be predicted what will
come next seeing the pattern or occurrence of a part of it. A shop,
for example, is said to have a veriety of articles if those articles are
of different types.

As far as writing is concerned, variety can be thought of in
terms of the following dimensions.

@ Length
Pattern
Mood @

Po

When we produce variety in our writing, we vary the Jength of
sentences and/or paragraphs, the pattern of words and/or
sentences, and the mood of words and sentences. Most of the
time the effectiveness of variety centers around a combined and
talanced presentation of all of these dimensions. As we'll shortly
wee, variety is to be produced by a number of ways, though its basis .
js always the above three.
Effective Writing Skills For Advanced Learners
8 odated Bangla e-books(pdf): www.facebook.com/tanbir.ebooks

. Variety of Words

The use of the same word or similar type of words to express
similar types of thoughts may create monotony. In such cases,
follow this rule.

Read the following example.

There was a controversy over the question “Will this plan be
effective?” among three managers. Mr. A said, "I think it's a good
plan.”
“Maybe it’s good, but is it effective?" said Mr. B.

Mr. C., who was silent so long. said, "How will you prove
it's good? And good in what sense?"

“Well,” said Mr. A, “can you prove it isn't?"

"Oh, come on!" said Mr. B, “Don't be silly Mr. A.”

“TI sure give you the proof,” Mr. A said.

Observe the use of "said" in the above sentences. How odd it
looks! Too boring, indeed. If you think for some time, you can
easily discover that “said” doesn't give the precise sense in all the
sentences; other verbs have to be used for the sake of both variety
and precision. A careful look over the sentences reveals that the
word "said" in them may be replaced by “declared/commented”,
"asked", "demanded", “disputed/challenged", “invited”, and “assured”,
respectively. So, now see the following version.

There was a controversy over this question “Will this plan be
effective?” among three managers. Mr. A declared, "I think it's a
good plan.”

"Maybe it's good, but is it effective?" asked Mr. B.

Mr. C, who was silent so long, demanded, “How will you
prove it's good? And good in what sense?”

“Well,” challenged Mr. A, “can you prove it isn't?”

“Oh, come on!" invited Mr. B, "Don't be silly Mr. A"

"Ok, I'll sure give you the proof.” Mr. A assured.

All e-books & Software : www.tanbircox.blogspot.com
Variety 81

How does the above dialog read now? Nice? Actually. by
varying the reporting verb. we've added spice and flavor to the
dialog. Now it's stronger, more penetrating. and more precise.

Sometimes variety and strength are produced by modifying the
reporting verb; that is, by mentioning how someone talked. In
doing this, different modifiers are used depending on the need of the
situations, See the following example. then.

She didn't know how to extort an answer from him. He was
obstinate, above all. But he didn’t seem to be crucl to her, So, the
asked him again. her mind hanging up between hope and
disappointment, "How can | see him now?"

“I don't know." said the man,

“You don't know, or you don't want to tell me?” she said.

He said, “I don't know.”

“But you seem to know—not just one thing, everything,”
said she.

“Well, you're right then,”

“Right about what?”

“That I seem to know everything.”

She said, “Why don't you tell me, then?"

“Come on with me", said he, "I'll tell you what I know about
him, but I won't let you see him.”

Now see the following version of the same dialog and compare
the one with the other.

She didn't know how to extort an answer from him. He was
obstinate, above all. But he didn’t seem to be cruel to her. So, She
asked him again, her mind hanging up between hope and
disappointment, “How can I see him now?" ae

“1 don't know.” said the man briefly. ;

"You don't know, or you don't want to tell me?” She
inquired doubtfully.

“I don't know."—the man firmly declared.

"But you seem to know—not just one thing, everything.” she

hall ad fid.
a 7

2 Effective Writing Skills For Advanced Learmers
Updated Bangla e-books(pdf): www.facebook.com/tanbir.ebooks
"Well, you're right then,”

“Right about what?"

"That I seem to know everything.”

She was still doubtful : Does he? Isn't he being ironical? She
attacked him in an undecided tone, “Why don't you tell me,
then?"

"Come on with me,” he invited passionately but
firmly, "I'll tell you what I know about him, but I won't let you
see him."

Observe how variety and precision are produced in the above
version of the dialog. Specifically, observe the use of modifiers.

In reporting, as shown above, you can use various verbs
d di ly said sc Some of them are :

Cae} thi.

p g on how sc

said, blurted out, announced, uttered, murmured, mentioned,
commented, remarked, whispered, shouted, screamed,
screeched, exclaimed, questioned, asked, asserted, declared,
stated, ejaculated, articulated, urged, verbalized, produced,
voiced, inquired, demanded, requested, pleaded.

You can also modify these verbs by the following :

affectionately, angrily, blandly, briefly, calmly, carelessly,
coldly, contemptuously, crossly, curtly, doubtfully, eagerly,
earnestly, emphatically, enthusiastically, faintly, fiercely,
foolishly, formally, gravely, grimly, gruffly, hopefully,
imperturbably, jauntily, kindly, laconically, concisely, lamely,
loudly, maternally, menacingly, mildly, vigorously,
vehemently, confidently, sharply, naively, obsequiously,
pleasantly, positively, negatively, proudly, disappointedly,
quietly, wildly, savagely, scornfully, self-consciously,
sincerely, sleepily, slowly, softly, solemnly, stiffly, timidly,
warily, weakly, wearily, willingly, etc.

Not that you should use various types of verbs and modifiers
only for reporting speeches, but you should do the same in other
cases too. Suppose, for example, you want to present various
types of laughter in a story or novel or case study or satirical

All e-books & Software : www.tanbircox.blogspot.com
Variety 83

article. Then what noun should you use to indicate what kind of
laughter? There are several kinds of laughters indeed, such as
laughter, giggle, guffaw, cackle, smile, titter, snicker (British
English snigger), chuckle and so on. Now, which gne should you
use depends on what kind of laughter you want to represent.
That's why you need to know such words very well. Also you need
to remember the subtle differences between such words. For this
purpose, it's best if you can take help from a handbook which can
help you lifelong as an encyclopedia. Whenever necessary, you can
refer to such a book from time to time. You may get help from the
books "Writers' Grammar" by the author of this book. Also, you
may consult my "Words that Often Confuse You."

o
C. Variety of Sentences and Paiterns

This is the most contributive technique of producing variety in your
writing. It involves or moves along all the dimensions—LENTH,
PATTERN, and MOOD. That is, length, pattern, and mood—all
(hese things can be varied of a sentence according to the need.
84 Effective Writing Skills For Advanced Learners

The following “rules” (if | may call them so) will present you with
various ways of doing it.

This means that you should vary the sentence patterns. Experience
has shown that novice writers often use statements (ie, assertive
sentences) in their writing, thus making it boring and unattractive.
Never do it. Consciously use a mix of these patterns in your
writing :

@ Statements

@ Question and Answer
@ Rhetorical Question
@ Exclamations

@ Imperatives

A E + (Stat, )
e / es or Enc

S'

If you do this, the MOODS of sentences will vary accordingly
An example will clarify the technique. Go through the following
paragraph.

That day we made a lot of fun. We all went into the jungle after the
picnic feast. It was a surprise for us. As for myself, I had never
seen so many monkeys, birds, trees, and flowers before. In some
places the trees huddled up to each other in such a manner that there
was hardly any path for us to walk along. Small hedges were
scattered here and there. As we walked along, the withered leaves
rustled under our feet rythmically. The birds were chirping around.
It was a deafening buzz of sound. If you have ever seen a brace of
hundreds of thousands of bees flying in the open air, then you can
imagine how charming a scenery it was for us to see a huge cloud
of bees swiftly passing overhead. The long-lasted harmonious
sound cought me spell-bound. I didn't know before that Nature is
so splendid.

Now go through the following version of it. This time the

patterns of the sentences have been varied.
Variety 85

That day we made a lot of fun. The picnic feast over, we all
went into the jungle. And what a surprise it was for us! As
for myself, never had I seen so many monkeys. birds, trees,
and flowers before. In some places the trees huddled up to each
other in such a manner that there was hardly any path for us to
walk along. Small hedges were scattered here and there. As we
walked along, the withered leaves rustled under our feet
rythmically, The birds were chirping around. What a deafening
buzz of sound! Have you ever seen a brace of hundreds of
thousands of bees flying in the open air? If you have, perhaps
only then can you imagine how charming a scenery it was for
us to see a huge cloud of bees swiftly passing overhead. The long-
lasted harmonious sound cought me spell-bound. Never did I
know before that Nature is so splendid.

As you've already seen, the first version of the paragraph is
monotonous. In it, all the sentences are statements having
"Subject Verb + Extention” construction. Sentences also begin
with similar kinds of words. As a result it bores the reader. But the
second version is much improved as compared to the first one. And
can you say what things have made it so? You've quessed rightly if
the bold-faced sentences have attracted your attention. Mind you,
such sentences as exclamations, questions, inverted word order
and so on arouse interest into the reader. They're reader-friendly.

86 Effective Writing Skills For Advanced Learners
Now let's see some examples.

1. Prepositional phrases : In that case. In the beginning,
Around five o'clock, After that, As for myself, In the first place,
etc.

2. Adverbs and adverbial phrases : Usually,
Originally, Unfortunately, All the same, Even so, etc.

3. Subordinate or dependent clauses : If that is true,
Though that's the reality, When in Rangpur, Because we're on
the wrong way, etc.

4. Conjunctions : And, But, Or, Yet, Either, Neither, Not
only, So, Therefore, etc.

5. Verbal infinitives : To begin with, To tell you the truth,
To do that work is. . ., etc.

6. Adjecti and adjective phrases : Headed by, Seen
from afar, Bored with those things, Torn into pieces, etc.

7. Participles: Seeing these things, Looking from a
different angle of view, Going there, etc.

8. Inversions: Never have I seen . . ., Not only did he do
that . . ., It's only when you believe it can you feel the. . ., etc.

Now we'll see how to use these techniques in essays. Read the
following passage and measure how much it appeals you.

Empty Vessels Sound Much

Those who can, do; those who can't, criticize or boast. He who's
most unable wants to keep it a secret by puffing out fat words. He
says he can do something. He says he can do the toughest thing on
earth. He thus attracts others’ attention toward his own gain.

There are others who just barnish their appearences to look
good, smart, and competent enough. They want themselves to be
judged by how they look, not by what they do.

Most of the time it's seen that quality goes inversely with
quantity. The huge banyan tree looks big, but is of less importance
than many other smaller trees. Examples abound everywhere to lead
one to the conclusion that people with too little ability brag too
much. Empty vessels always sound much.
variety 87

Don't bother about the idea development of the passage. Just
judge it by the way it reads. How does it read? "Monotonous’—
tmost probably this would be your answer. And so it is. But the
following version of it is much improved. Pay special attention to
the changes made.

Empty Vessels Sound Much

Those who can, do; those who can't, criticize or boast.
Regrettably, he who is most unable wants to keep his inability
secret by puffing out fat words. "I can do anything—even the
the toughest thing,"
By shouting out empty words he only wants to attract

says he loudly. But can he actually?

others’ attention to his own gain,

There are, however, others who barnish their appearences to
look good, smart, and competent enough. They want themselves to
be judged by how they look, and not by what they do.

And what about quality in reality? Doesn't it go
inversely with quantity? As a matter of fact, people tend to
show quantity to suppress their weakness in quality. For
example, The huge banyan tree looks big, but is of less
importance than many other smaller trees. Examples, including
these ones, abound in everywhere to lead one to the conclusion
that people with too little ability brag too much. And why not?
Empty vessels sound much—goes the saying. But do they
sound much because they're empty, or they're empty
because they sound much? Perhaps both are its causes.

Undoubtedly, this version reads better. And can sige ry why?
Because there's variety. Words in bold type have produced this
variety. Think over them for some time.

RS

Besides varying sentence type, you need to vary sentence
length. You must keep a balance or harmony, sometimes by giving
88 Effective Writing Skills For Advanced Learners

the breath some rest, and sometimes by exhausting it. You must,
however, do such variation in such a way that it agrees with the
flow of thought through the sentences. A long sentence, as a rule,
receives emphasis upon the main clause of it. and so should not be
used when you want to emphasize a specific point. A small
sentence, on the other hand, is considered as a whole, and not
part of another bigger sentence. That's why ideas expressed in
short sentences get individual emphasis. In varying the sentence
length, you should keep it all in mind.
Read the following passage.

The Ballot is Stronger than the Bullet

Power is the ability to do something or make others do something.
It comes from various sources—the people, the system, and the the
self. We see power in the reality in many forms such as authority,
knowledge, and muscle power. We normally identify muscle power
as the ultimate utility of all kinds of power. But it is what we want
to see about it, and not what we should see. Though muscle power
can be successfully used to do some specific jobs, it's not all in all.
Tt has its limitation and most of the time it can rather destroy than
build.

Muscle power, however, is a necessity and is not avoidable.
But never should we put too much emphasis on it. History shows
that those kings and leaders who have considered muscle power the
utmost goal have perished. The reality shows that such power have
always destroyed itself. Now a relevant question crops up: What
does real power lie in? The answer is simple, though it’s not very
convincing. The real power source is those people on whom that
power is to be applied. Nobody can deny it that people are the main
source of all powers. Peculiar though it may sound, power comes
from the powerless to the powerful. Originally it energes from the
consensus of the general public about some norm of behavior.
They choose from among them who will apply the power given to
him by them on themselves, And if it's misused by the leader, they
Vanieny 89

again withdraw the power they gave him. What it all implies is
that people's mandate or the ballot is the primary source of power.
The bullet may suppress it for the time being, but it can't obviate
it in the long run. So it’s rightly said that the ballot is stronger
than the bullet.

How did the above passage read? Boring, though better than a
very bad one. Thére is a variety of sentence types in it, of course,
but what has made it dull is the sentence length. All the sentences
are about the same length—a great flaw of writing. The number of
words in each consecutive sentence from the beginning is 12, 12,
15114) 16,499, 15210310) D7 TOU 125915. TS, 23;, 16) 17,18,
17, 18 and 12.

But now read this version of the passage :

The Ballot is Stronger than The Bullet

What's power? It's the ability to do something or make others
do something, And where does it come from? It comes from
various sources—the people, the system. the self. Power, as we
see it in the reality, is seen in many froms such as authority,
knowledge, muscle power. We normally identify muscle power as
the ultimate utility of all kinds of power. But it's what we want to
see and not what we should sec. Though muscle power can be
successfully used to do some specific jobs. it's not all in all. It has
its limitations, Most of the time it can rather destroy than build.
Not that muscle power is not needed at all, It is ie
necessity. But never should we put too much emphasis nit.
History shows that those kings and leaders who have considered
muscle power the utmost goal have perished. Such power has
destroyed itself. Now a relevant question crops up What does
real power lie in? The answer is simple, though it’s hard to
convince people. The real power source is, truth to tell, those
people on whom that power is to be applied. In other words,
people are the source of all powers. Peculiar though it may sound,
power comes from the powerless to the powerful. Originally it
90 Effectve Suis Foe Actvanced

Updated Bangla e-books(pdf): www.facebook.com/tanbir.ebooks
emerges from the consensus of the general public about some norm
of behaving, They choose one from among them whe will, for their
own good, supervise their behavior and, if necessary, apply the
power allowed by them on themselves. And if it's misused, they
again withdraw their power, What it all implies ts that people's
mandate or the ballot is the primary source of power, The bullet
may suppress it for the time being, but it doesn't sustain long.
Afier all, the ballot is stronger than the bullet

Didn't this version of the passage read better than the former?
What's the cause, mainly? As you've already understood, the
reason is the variation in the number of words in the sentences.
The number of words in each sentence from the beginning is 2, 11,
6, 11, 19, 14, 13, 17, 4, 10, 9, 3, 10, 17, 5. 12, 10, 18, 10, 13,
15, 26, 9, 17, 13, and |. Now see what has made the difference.
There are, however, some other changes in this new version,
which you can easily detect.

This is a very widely used technique of producing variety. When
such interrupting elements are thrown into a sentence, you need
to pause while reading it. Consequently, there occurs a break—a
break in the breath, mood, flow of logic. and above all, monotony.
The result is as has already been mentioned—variety. The following
examples will clarify the technique. The above techniques have been
used in the sentences marked (b},

1. (») He has died. He was chairman of this club. His name
was Mr. Khan.
(b) Mr. Khan, chairman of this club, has diced.
lappositive)

2. {a} If I'm to tell the truth, | mst say that that man about
whom you are talking is not very honest:
All e-books & % Software - www. tanbircox.blogspot.com
Varfetr

(b)

. fa)

(b)

. fa)

(b)

- ta)

(b)

(a)

(b)

91

That man about whom you are talking is, truth to
tell/truly speaking/to speak the truth, not very
honest

{absolute—It has no grammatical relationship with the
sentence in which it's used. It provides an additional
information about an element ci the sentence. And
even if it's removed from the sentence, the structure of
the sentence is not hampered in any way),

People say that that pond was dug by some
supernatural creatures

That pond—they ( = people) say—was dug by some
supernatural cratures. (absolute)

bass tiger was dead. It became dried, It redyced into

a tiger, dead and dried, reduced into dust.
{modifier}

ff I'm allowed to call him a “Banglish”, | must say that
he is one of the worst men in this locality.

That “Banglish’, If | may call him so/if I'm allowed
to call him so, is one of the worst men in this locality.
(absolute).

As Ive stated earlier, such sentence patterns are not
very effective

Such sentence patterns, as I've stated earlier, are
not very effective.

The following example will show you how to apply these
techniques in writings. o

The More Man Gets, aes ee eee &

Man's desire has no end. He wants what ix posse 6 him to
achieve and what is not. He wants more than he desggts. He never
gets all he wants. As he gets hing, be unc Is how nice
it is to possess it. This proud feeling makes him more desinous. At
a moment this desire turns into greed, Needs can be satisfied, groeds
never. Because this ix the reality, be can not satisfy his greed, His
greeds go on building up.

92 Ettective Writing Stdlls For Advanced Learners
Updated Bangla e-books(pdf): www.facebook.com/tanbir.ebooks
Man dees mot want to be rich: he wants to be richer than

others, This competitive desire of man pushes hin hard toward the
enticing way of more and more greed. He can never get out of the
quicksand of avarice (972). The more man gets, the more he
warts.

Read the above passage very carefully. once again if needed. If
you do so, then you'll see that the sentences are very nice and
effective, but the writing is very bad. It has many flaws ; the idea
doesn't flow smoothly from one sentence into another: the
sentence length doesnt vary; the sentences always begin with the
same kind of word/phrase (subject); there is no break or pause for
breathing: and so on. Now compare this passage with its following
version, Compare word for word and discover why it (the second
version) reads much better. Notice that not only absolutes have
been used, but other changes have been made too. Can you
identify them?

The More Man Gets, The More He Wants

Man's desire has no end, He wants both what is possible for him to
achieve and what is impossible He wants, in most of the
cuses, more than he deserves. Consequently. he never gets all he
wants, M as he gets hing, he und: ds how nice it
is to possess it. This proud feeling makes him more desirous. At a
moment this desire turns into greed. And needs—as a scholar
has remarked—can be satisfied. greeds never If this is the
reality, then bow can tris greeds be satisfied? Rather, his greeds go
con building up.

“Man doesn’) want to be nich: he wants to be richer than
others.” This competitive—better say malicious—desire of
man pushes him hard toward the enticing way of more and more
greed. So, no exit! He can never get out of the quicksand of avarice.
The more man gets, the more the wants, and still the more he
wants.

All e-books & Software : www.tanbircox.blogspot.com

In cases, novels, and even in essays, you often have to quote
others’ speeches. Vary the quoting method. The following
examples will help you lear the techniques.

Mr. Baker said, “Though it’s truce, | don't consider it imponant~
“Though it’s true. | don’t consider it important.” said Mr. Baker.
“Though it's trac.” said Mr. Baker, “I don't consider it important.

When a dialog between two or more persons is very long,
using the reporting verb “said.” “replied” ete. may cause boredom. In
such cases it's sometimes good not to use any reporting verb at
oll. For example. read the following dialog.

Then he said, “I'm leaving today.~

“But you'd better go tomorrow. The sky's cloudy today.” said
she.

“But.” said he, “I've a hurry. 'm afraid.”

"I know that.” she said, “Yet 1 don't want to see you in

“Don't worry. [I have reached there before the storm comes.”
he assured.

“Well. 20 if you will.” she said, “but carry this umbrella
with you"

“No need, thanks.” he murmured.

“Why?” she asked,

“I'm not going.” he said.

“L hope so.” said she.

The above dialog reads boring. Its because the clauses, “she
said,” “said he,” he murmured” ete. have been overused.<When a
tlialog is long enough. its good not to use these clauses in some
places. a Hine Rina Seseiony OF Hes aaa RE,

Then he said “I'm leaving today.”

“But.” said she, “you'd better go tomorrow. See the sky's
cloudy.”

“But P've a hurry. I'm afraid”

* know that. yet I don't want to see you in danger.”
o4 Effective Writing Skis for Acvonced Leome»nt
Updated Bangla e-books(pdf): www.facebook.com/tanbir.ebooks

He came closer to her, And putting his hand on her shoulder,
assured, “Don't worry, I'll have reached there before the storm
comes”

“Well. go uf you will,” she said, heaving a deep. sigh,
“but carry this umbrella with you.”

“No need, thanks.”

“Why?”

“He paused a» moment. Looked directly into her
eyes, He drew a sweet encouraging smile on his lips.
“Because I'm not going.”

“IL hope so.” She hugged her,

This time the dialog has been much improved. Now it not only is
not tonous, it contains some lively but brief description of the
situation too. So, when you write such dialogs, experiment with
your ways of reporting to come to a balanced and attractive
representation.

D. Variety of Paragraphs
As you've varied sentence length. so should you with paragraph
length. Paragraphs should be made long or short depending on
their content and importance. Read the following passage very
carefully.

Money is a Good Servant, but a Bad Master
Money is the second God—goes the saying. Ina sense, that is true.
The wheel of the whole universe of activities centers around one
point—money. Money buys wealth, happiness, even love
sometimes. Mankind all over the world kneels down to it. Truly
speaking. there is hardly any job on earth that money can not
accomplish,

Truc, money is very powerful, But what is the nature Of its
power? Being a part and parcel of our daily life, does nt deserve the
honor we give it?

As 4 matter of fact. money is a good servant bat a bad master.
It serves you best—with anything. in any way. But if you worship

All e-books & Software : www.tanbircox.blogspot.com
wheter 95

it, M conquers you wholly. Then you Cease to be yourself, Not
only that, you can pot be a good servant of God as well,

in this regard, one thing we must remember : we cam money
to live, and we do not live to earn money, Those who carn money
Ww live carn it and spend iV nm enjoy their lives. They change
money into hap prosperity, develop and well-being,
but money can not change them, They can enjoy the gifts of life.
But, on the other hand, those who live to carn moncy live like
slaves fo it. It is those people who are the root of all evils—chacs,
destruction, murder, robbery, bribery and s0 on. Not only they can
hot control themselves, but they are controlled by money, We
must run after money, but must not run towand hell

So, money can never be our God—even the second. For “you
must have one God enly/whe will be at the expense of two?”

In the above passage, there are five paragraphs. But does each
jewegraph have the same number of sentences/lines as the others?
No. In it. some paraqraphs are short. some are relatively long. This
veriety has rendered it readable and effective. Consider the second,
(hird, and the last paragraphs, They are relatively short. The
wecond or the last paragraph, for example, could be included in the
previous paragraph, but then they (the second and the fast
paragraphs) would lose their importance. Moreover, fusing them
ito one big paragraph would make them boring and unreadable.
Human attention and eyes need some relief and rest. And stiriety
ensures it. As far as writing ts concerned, bear in mind tht

96 Eftective Skil For Advanced Leaner:
Updated RY. e-books(pdf): www.facebook.com/tanbir.ebooks
Variety of The Beginning

There's only one beginning of a passage or paragraph. So why
talking about its variety? You may ask this question to yourself, as
fm not available by your side. Yes, that’s a relevant question indeed.
but | mean it somewhat otherwise. Its suggested that you—

@ experiment the beginning of the essay with various types of
sentences (See CHAPTER 3) and choose the one that suits best
the essay you've written. Such experimentation should be made
both before and after the writing.

@ plan the beginning and the ending at the same time, so that
you can plan the one keeping an eye on the other.

@ not begin all the paragraphs in the essay with the same type
of sentences.

Follow the last instruction with special care

F. Variety and The Ending

For variety in the ending of the essay, follow the instructions given
in the previous section about the variety in the beginning,

G. Variety of Variety

So far we've discussed about various ways of producing variety in
writing. You've learnt them one by one, but that doesn't mean that
you should use them one by one in your writing. Rather, you have
to be prepared well so that you can use them all. or as many of
them as possible, in your writing. Actually, all the techniques should
be applied. But remember one thing: we want variety; so don't
overuse any single technique in one piece of writing. That will
weaken the essay. Let me repeat: use a variety of the variety
techniques. Never make the writing monotonous.

All e-books & Software : www.tanbircox.blogspot.com
USING COLORFUL
Morse CHAPTER

LIVELY
LANGUAGE 6

How forcible are right words.
— Old Testament
A thought embodied and embrained in fit
words walks the earth a living being
— EP. Whipple
Language is the dress of thought
— Samuel Johnson

A. Colorful and Natural Phrases
B. Lively and Effective Words
C. A Word of Caution

wig Colorful And Lively Language 99

As you've seen, only making santences and arranging them around
» theme does not ensure a good writing, nor does effective writing
mean only grammatically correct sentences. Writing, in fact, is
worthless i it's not attractive and readable. And one of the ways of
making your writing readable is using lively and colorful language.
Hut what's that and how's that done?—you may ask. Well shortly
know what and how.

A. Colorful and Natural Phrases
Let's proceed by way of examples . Read the following group of

sentences,

eee fem, ae sae eerie Sarek opengl coma WIA
a) HS, Wet Se-aree wile ae) fare farce aegB wie
PICS BOCA, COATT ATS EH, ae YA ATMEL SSTS ET, TE GATE
wren] erecee auerde weafe wed) 2 aaeae Grace coe wie
Siem fe cara ace eacey lees ecm fe Ure, Ge DPE TEE CTS Tal |
freee wh ew sacs cose ear, cexih fares err en core cate
rise Dice Yaerel COR WETTETS STs FETS AY

A student wrote the above sentences. She was partially trained
i writing skills. Obviously, her idea development is not clear,
though the sentence arrangement ts fairly good. But the most
portant weakness of her writing is that her language is not
strong and colorful, She could have made her writing strong and
colorful by using some idiomatic phrases. Read the following
version of the group of sentences and compare it with the aboww.

aes fen, TER ARCO WR-STOMTONS SEES wR CHAT
Wore WIC TBR Is au | UTS CeMTUTE CHE ETT TCH
SrnTeat, CONTR SATE EU, Ot TE IROTHE SETS EU, site OTA
mcd fy ca 4 earme comers coare cofere face be we ate
corey whafere ace fe axe, whe wore are ereT fitere oes com
bere com eum, costa ferme CO Gere] OTe Ges aores sft
Wee-cerea Com S] Sca ears ors Poee “5 ae

As you can see, this revised version reads better, Why? It has han
lwen possible because of the colorful and natural phrases like
100 Effec Sidlis For leames
Updated Bangla e-books(pdf): www.facebook.com/tanbir.ebooks
“Rees vive com Ben,” “ops fab,” “Sy vat” and so on. Such phases
are idiomatic, They have their our personality: color, taste. flavor.
They protect your writing from being artificial (#*) and add spice
and flavor to it. As far as English ts concerned, such efficiency and
potential of this lanquage is enormous. So, to be a good writer. it's
necessary for you to learn as many such phrases as possible

together with their proper use.

Now let's see some more examples.

|___Ordinary Writing _| __Colorful Writing _|
1. The atmosphere was 1. The atmosphere was still as
without sound and death. That's why | felt
movement, That's why I felt | uneasy. Yet | had to work
uneasy, Yet | had to work there, all alone, because |

there, all alone, because | needed money badly.
Lneeded money badly.

2. ort anaes ot once 2. ora sree caret ore firm |
om

3. He is honest. no doubt. but | 3. He is honest, no doubt, but
he boasts of himself. Maybe | he blows his own horn.

he leads a luxurious and Maybe he lives like a king. but
comfortable lifestyle, but few people admire him

few admine hirn.
4. OF Cet Brest -at Orne | OF CRT 4. co Bree git ) ee wr oe
fami aerate erro wat cree wit | Te ga STF

5. He has much money and 5. He is a tycoon. He'll get
wealth, Even if he commits a away with murder, even
crime equivalent to murder, hell

6.58 gre ae eee 6 | 6. we HE ee aT eT
Won #1 Cel) wren ee aT om ee

7. Her speech had had no 7. Her speech cut no ice with
impression on me. |t just me. |t just fell flat.

All e-books & Software : www.tanbircox.blogspot.com
(sting Colorful And Lively Language 101
8. 0 ere ores ep ae ees 8. eee ores wore ret fer

en) cerns errseh ye Bee Ace Set curate wren Ste fare |
9. If you give him an 9. Give him an inch, and he'll

opportunity, he'll seek more and | take a mile.

exploit you.
10. In the beginning they 10. In the beginning they
criticized me saying that I would] slighted away my efforts, but |
fail But_at_ last | was successful_ | had the last laugh. |

The above examples clearly show how you can make your
writing colorful and natural. | may remind you ; Use idioms where
they suit. For this you have to learn most frequently used and
current idioms. But how?—most people ask. They report that they
can memorize and learn such idioms, but, unfortunately, they can't
remember them as and when required. They simply don't come to
their mind in time of writing. For example, one complains that he
can write +

Don't believe him because he is an unknown person here.
Very easily. but s sentence like the following doesn’t spontaneously
(¥erFEsr4) occur to his mind ;

Don't believe him ; he is a dark horse here.
Or, he can easily write a sentence like this :

Jn the beginning | could not gct your point, but at last, after much
thinking and calculation, | understood it,
But the following colorful alternative doesn’t touch his mind
naturally :

In the beginning | couldn't get your point, but at last, I saw the
light. Re

This is a problem, no doubt, but it can be so S“For this
youve to go through a different type of exercise whith Is not the
subject matter of this book. Not only that, you've 43 have an active
list of most frequently used idioms and the sense each of them
gives. Such things you'll find In my book “Writers’ Grammar”, a
lifetime company and an exhaustive guide.

No less important than idioms are phrasal verbs. Phrasal verbs,
most of them being idiomatic, help you speak and write concisely,

102 Effective Seth For Learert
Updated Bangla e-books(pdf): www.facebook.com/tanbir.ebooks
effectively, naturally, and colorfully. Each phrasal verb. like e.
idiom, has its own personality - you can—as it were—"touch” it,
“feel” it, “smell” it, and “see” it. Most of all, phrasal verbs express

your thoughts most concisely, while keeping intact the genuine

mood of tone of your thought. The folk les will clarily
the point.
Ordinary Language Concise and Idiomatic
Language

1, sre face fore $F Ceres ee
wie RN oes OM See oT

2. an em aiferere Ge |

3. OU STRHE Es SRS CoCeTE
4. SR exe wag a See Ss ot
At Cte STSTe et

5, ala cea fafa frews gare
HHS, em gare snares frrafers |

6. eR OH Me Cel! See SS Se
=

7, Now go away. Don't boiter
here any more. Let me work.
8. He led me into the contract,
as though he trapped a prey.
He did it by tricks.

7. Now clear out! Let me
work.
8. He trapped me into the
contract.

9, CLM, axe GF OI Se
Anfgce sreze waft aT

D. (uy BTA) ATH TEM

10. The wolf ate the pig and
was satisfied,

10. The wolf ate the pig up.
Or, The woll gobbled (t™ 7°
fice Gee) the pig up.

1.1. He was anxious but he
laughed artificially to shake off

11. He laughed away his
anxiety.

[the anxiety.

All e-books & Software : www.tanbircox.blogspot.com
( uitig Cofoefinl And Lively Lingmage

103

12. SORTS Se WIE Be
sories Sy) Ea SeSes Stee
SU Ki PCS ATS AT

12. Sree Sere are eS o's
ere farey a;

13, Let us talk. Don't interrupt
our conversation

13. Let us talk Don't butt In,

14. On receiving this message
she suddenly started
tears.

14. On receiving this message,
she burst Into tears.

15, Sam see ceces arm ot far
wt

15. Sea sie xeeee Siew wr facet
Fi

16. She hurt his feelings deeply

by (making) such a rude remark.
17_ sfaty ya wees cornea |

16. She cut him to the quick

by such a rude remark,
17. S20) Fes Scere

18. The film has become very
popular in Dhaka.

18. The film has cought on in
Dhaka.

19. doce dts @ aerate
OTE TH COTES TTR TET CRE
21, Slee oes ore wearers z=
cate

19, dee ihre co as onces Ove
LESS CE THM
21. 3s axe oer Sos ETE

22. The market is now
23. quar aes Stirs
orerna ame Cifere fru cues |

24. He has taken away two of
my employees by offering them
a higher salary.

25, This month we'll have to
reduce (#317) our expenditure
on ette.

22. The market ts now
[bubbling over with fruit__|
23. Haren gee stories cal
rere yen caven ace fire crice
24. He hes enticed away two
of my employees by offering
them a higher ;

25, This month we'll havecto
economize on cigarettt

a

26. Edit the essay and remove
the unnecessary words and
phrases.

26. Edit out the

words and phrases from the
essay,

Or, Edit the essay out of the
unnecessary words and

fa5es

Hoctive Writrg Sat For Acivannect Learnery

Undated Rancgia e-hoaks/iodi wa tacohoak comifanhirehaaks

27. The thought of his 27. The thought of his
mother's death is giving him mothers death eating into
much pain internally. his heart.

28. aca ares H fire fear Srey 28. ess sree @ fe weet eee
29. What is he thinking about | 29. What is he dwelling on

now? now?

20, ae eR | 30. 2S Are WIA

31. The pain will be less 31. The pain will ease off
severe/intense.

32. At last he stood up to say | 32 At last he rose to his feet
something. to say something.

33, When everybody failed, he | 33. When everybody failed to
came up and solved the solve the problem, he came up

problem by following a direct | and cut the knot.
approact.

Like the above ones, numerous other phrasal verbs are there in
English. Some are only used in conversation, some-in informal
writing. and some in formal writing only. If you want to write like
an experienced hand, you must learn them all, paying special
attention to the complete sense of each But you cant grasp them
only by picking them up from a dictionary ; you've to use them too.
In writing, mind you, practice ts no less imp than th al
learning, However, for a fuller understanding of such phrasal verbs,
you may consult the book "Writers’ Grammar” by this author, And
for memorizing tactics, see "Tactics for Learning Phrasal Verbs"
by the same author.

Another way of coloring and adding spice to your writing is
using proverbs and adages, Practice using such proverbs in your
writing, for they smell natural and di See the folk

os

All e-books & Software : www.tanbircox.blogspot.com
(stig Colorfad And Livedy Langgeage

Writ
1, cemdra Verh Want ETE
Som eure ape axe om, feos arty

Writh
1. CRG Wer wm Ses EEE a,
Sas were He- Gren gee fH Fare
A Oey are ST, Corea #1 cones eed
Bal: ill

2. OS awe Sire cover a ce GR
wea Sees Bel, Bes c Sree gE
Ke SRT | HES © SATE SET

2, ote awe aE coray a cet) yh
were Suceree Se, Sek 6 rere Ee
Ae EM | BHA 0 SATE SETS a

rere wa tet firs — curar cet)

For English p their ill and. their Bangla
Equivalents. see “Writers' Grammar” by this author.

B. Lively and Effective Words

We express our thoughts by words, no doubt, but often many of us
cant choose the right word for the right situation. This is because,
first, many novice writers ot students dont know enough words,
and, second, they can't appropriately use the words they know,
Good writing is characterized by the use of lively, strong, and exact
words. But what are strong words? Let's see some examples.

“my cen? <iere fixers ote So) ere eee cs UT ares Aree

Ste Cre ace Sra
The bold-faced portion In the above sentences are meant to explain
ad situation. If you're able to choose a suitable word, you can
discard (3 Gm) the description of the situation and minimize the
number of words. The following sentence would more effectively
express the meaning the above ones intend to -

“air” (aera) Shere Sa come .

&
Here, the use of "erm S27 is worthwhile and appropriate. It
has the power to express the emotion and mood ofthe situation.

“2 Se Oe Corer Wary 2 oer!” Geer there warerers aay
Ai
In this sentence the clause “get arfecu . . . ze CH" describes the
mood of the situation. But isn't the folk more effective than
the above in doing the same?

A.

sf

%;,

ot
3s

106 & Sits For Advanced Leamer
Updated Bangla e-books(pdf): www.facebook.com/tanbir.ebooks
“6 SO WA CTEM Wet SE Corer!” code som |

Clearly, the phrase “cedS S10" is stronger and more effective here,
isn’t it?

English vocabulary is stronger and more enriched than Bangla.
In English, any word has other synonyms, but all the synonyms
don't necessarily have the same connotation (aTIf). As a result,
each word is normally used to point to a specific situation or
meaning. For example, laughter may be of various kinds : giggle.
cackle. guifaw, smile etc. But which word should be used in which
situation? You must know the complete and accurate definition of
each to be able to use thern accurately, Let's see some examples.

OF Swere Sau ae oy Se wel SEA TS ees

The above sentence is an ordinary one. It could be replaced by the
following for more effectiveness -

rs rere wy ES SSCS MT |

Clearly, the word “eregrt” best gives the meaning “Ste CTATey
eo wee wy wyetae Shae cle”. Therefore, the sent
She was moving her fingers quickly and wildly on the
floor to find the pen.
can be replaced by :
She was scrabbling about on the floor to find the pen.
The latter is stronger because of the word "scrabble". To scrabble
means to move one’s fingers quickly and wildly to find something:
So, why should you use such # big phrase when you can imply the
whole sense by only one word? Now consider the following series
of examples.

|_Lively (#1t*#) Language _|
1. When she saw the ghost, 1. When she saw the ghost,

she cried out loudly on a high} she screamed for help.
note in fear for help.
2. The baby is walking 2. The baby is faltering.
unsteadily for lack of

All e-books & Software : www.tanbircox. blogspot.com
Using Colorful Ana Lively Language

107

3. 1 won't let it happen here”,
she declared angrily and
d

3. "1 won't let it happen here”.
she fulminated.

4_ | don't like the old woman's
meaningless childish talk

5. She dropped the plate on the
floor and tt broke into pieces
violently and noisily.

4. | don't like the old woman's
| prattle (2242).

5. She dropped the plate on the
floor and tt smashed.

6. "| don't like it, he
expressed discontent. Then
he looked at the gift steadily
for a long time He then
jumped quickly and suddenly
and said, "T like it!” and took
hold of it violently from my
hand and pressed it to his
bosom much

6. “I don't like it” he grumbled
Then he stared at the gift. He
then sprang up and ssid. "| like
it and snatched |t away from
my hand and hugged it.

7. “My wile broke it”, he said
sudenly and accidentally,
though he actually didn't
want to. At that his wile said
very angrily, “You liar! Shut
up!”

7. “My wife broke it”, he
blurted out. At that his wile
exploded, "You liar! Shut up!”

8. When asked why he had
done it, he said nothing and
moved away through the door

in _a twisting way.

8. When asked why he had
done it, he said nothing and
slithered away through the
door

9. If you treat that man
without necessary respect.
tt will be unwise of you

9. If you trifle with that dian,
it will be unwise of yous”
Ss

10. He made his beard (#1"§)
neat and even by cutting the
unwanted parts. | could hardly
recognize him, He walked past
me quietly and secretly so

10, He trimmed his beard. |
could hardly recognize him. He
sneaked past me

that | couldn't see him.

Effective Writing Sits For

108
Undated Pangla e-hoaks/ndf\:

Advanced Leamnes
nw facebook com/tanhir ehaaks

11. | didn't know why they
were waiting there ; they
seemed to have no clear
reason. So | went near them
and asked, What motive do
have in mind?”

11.1 didn't know why they
were loitering there. So |
approached them and asked,
"What are you up to”

As you've already seen, lively and strong words are those
which can effectively replace more than one word. They express
the situation, mood, and manner, They are brisk. Always use such

words in your writing instead of

tsing wordy descriptions,

Often the use ol the verb form rather than the noun form of
words enables us to express ideas strongly and. concisely. For

example

Wordy

Concise

L. The situation made it
necessary for us to wait
long time.

1. The situation necessitated
us to wait a long time.

2. This exercise will give you
the ability to long.

2. This exercise will enable you
to live long.

3. This substance will make
your teeth white.

3. This substance will whiten
your teeth.

4. They caught the tiger and
put it in a cage

4. They encaged the tiger.

5. She is moaning for her dead

mother.

§. She is bemoaning her dead
mother

Sometimes we can directly use nouns as verbs, thereby making

the writing more effective and
examples.

more concise. See the following

Wordy (Noun)

1. He put the burden of doing
the work on me.

2. | took the responsibility on
my shoulder.
3. She cast her eyes on me

etl

All e-books & Software : www.tanbircox. blogspot.com
Ung Cohurfal Aud Lively Language

4. We gave him the name
Tutul

4. We named him Tutul.

5. Fix the buttons of your
shirt

5. Button your shirt.

6. The factory is supplied with
excessive men.

8. Cross out the word with a

7. She needs to see a doctor.

6. The factory has been
overmanned

7. She needs to be doctored

8. Pen through the word.

12. We put the accessories in a
bundle

pen,

9. We put the fruit in a bag. 9. We bagged the [ruit_
10. Use oil in your hair 10. Oil your hair

11 Pour water on the plants, | 11. Water the plants.

12. We bundled the
accessories.

13. Record the time that you
take to read the passage.

13. Time yourself while reading
the

14. They came near

[preposition! the shore.

14. They neared the shore

15. We removed the skin from
the dead goat.

15. We skinned the dead goat

In choosing words for your essay, you may use the following

“6M MODEL" of word selection,

110 Effective Writing Skilts For Leamen
Updated Bangla e-books(pdf): www.facebook.com/tanbir.ebooks

Here “meaning” means what you want to mean, “Mood”
means the mood of the situation. It involves the mood of the verb.
By “magnetism” is meant how one word is influenced by the
presence of another word nearby. “Minimization” requires you to
express your thought as concisely (economically, 4f%sert2) as
possible. “Mode” or “Manner™ refers to the style of your writing.
The choice of words or expressions is di d by such style ;
whether your style is formal or informal or colloquial (ie.
conversational) ; or objective, or subjective eic “Market” refers
to the reader for whom you're writing. Your choice of word should
be determined by the level of experience and education of the
readers. Il, for example, you're writing for the laymen or general
public, you should not use technical words or jargons. If, again,
your readers are not educated enough, you must use simple and
plain words and structures.

Perhaps you already have understood how the above “model”
can be used. Yet, we'll see some examples to illustrate how to use
it.

Your friend talks proudly about his wealth. Suppose you don't
like his such talking. To you, he seems to be too much or
excessively proud. So, when you talk about his such behavior,
you're in a critical (#1013) mood. To express this mood, you
can use “too” in the following manner :

He talks too proudly about his wealth.

Now you know that your writing is efficient when you're able
to express your thoughts in the minimum number of words. This
is called economy of words. Now, how to achieve this end? Is
there a single word or phrase that describes the mood in the
mininum number of words keeping the meaning intact? Yes, there
is. Only one word is enough ; brag. So, you can rewrite the
sentence as follows :

He brags about his wealth,

Here “brag” is a strong and lively word.
Now let's see what's meant by magnetism. Suppose you went
to express the meaning contained in this sentence -
All e-books & Software : www.tanbircox.blogspot.com

| yg Colorfael And Lively Language lll

ree Sr OR aes OE ETE,
After writing the sentence, you discover that you'w not been able
lo express your mood (here it is satirical or 479T8%). How can such
ood be expressed? you're thinking. Then you look for the
wnenyms of the words “8t3™ in a dictionary of synonyms. You
lind that the words have many synonyms Grits T) some of
which are as follows -

Be : SG, TEST, ESM, SHR, Eerere, Seas, os, HD |

econ af, Srst, SM, eae |

Sry t corer, mr, ere, Cratirs, wrere, fpr)

After much thinking and selecting, you come up with the
following sentence :

GUUBS Be Gt RO CHLN I COTTE |
which expresses your mood the most effective way. The repetitive
wound of “2” in “WR” “Re” and “Ae” creates 8 satirical effect here. This
fs called alliteration (@4#™), But don't think that alliteration always
produces satirical (#3¥T8%) effect ; rather, it can successfully be used
to produce other effects - solemnity (*17SC7T=Te1), emotion (S18),
priticism (like satire), funny contrast or comic effect and so on.
Observe the following.

A> What kind of a man is he?
B: Why. very good. Always busy to find fault with friends and
fellows, though the fruit is fight and frowning.

Bs answer is ironical (CowW*). He wants to say that actually that
men is not very good. Observe the use of “I at the beginning of
many words. The combind effect (magnetism) of the. ts
expresses B's mood the right way. os

Now a different type of example. 5a

o

STE Em A NRE a REN AE
The writer of the above sentence didn't consider the word “J¥" in
light of the word “Ge Gen” “eraw” “esi” “zara” etc. Actually,
the word “q" doesn't suit here, because the influence of the other
“wire” words demands that the “31y7 word "4%" be replaced by
“ws” So. the sentence should be either—

12 Effective Sais For Aavanced
Updated Bangla e-books(pdf): www.facebook.com/tanbir.ebooks
MRD CES CREEL vee wIreTD ICS eet) Corre STS APTTAT ECS |

w=

Tees ow cere ae Wace eh come ere erES aT ee
The second sentence, however, could be written in the “77afe" as
follows <

qeitre etn cera a wars os core sea aerate ea eB
Likewise, you have to consider which word best fits with which
word in English.

The Sources of Such Words : As you've already seen, you
can take help of a good dictionary of synonyms to experiment. with
the use of words in various ways to eventually come up with an
effective writing. But a synonym doesn’t mean a completely
equivalent word. They also have subtle (4) differences among
them, which you must know, Uni ly. normal dicth of
synonyms don't tell you anything about such differences. That's
why you need a specialized dictionary of synonyms planned for
writers. You may consult these books of this author : Writers!
Grammar, Words that Often Confuse You, and The Critical
Learner's Dictionary of Synonyms and A ins : with subtle
diff of 9

C. A Word of Caution

In using idioms, however, you must take care that you don't
overuse them. Most of all. you should use those idioms which an
easily understandable. Else, you'll make a hotchpotch of them,
eventually coming to lithe sense. Again, never to be careful enough
in choosing them so that they match your style (ie, formal,
informal, or colloquial),

All e-books & Software : www.tanbircox.blogspot.com
CONCISENESS CHAPTER
AND SIMPLICITY 7

Brevity is the soul of wit
— Shakespeare, Harnlet
Updated Bani i Boney en r.ebooks

%

Co OS
wow. faceboor.com/tanbir. ebooks

All e-books & Software : www.tanbircox.blogspot.com
Lomcisemess And Simeplicity 115

Using unnecessary words in your writing makes it inefficient and
cumbersome. The thought which coukd be expressed by a single
word should not be expressed by more than one word if they're not
needed for rhetorical (SPT) purposes. Using words in excess of
the need may not make the language grammatically incorrect, but ts
incorrect and non-standard according to the grammar of writing.
For example, to say

ee eS ere, Bl Es Sed SM SCH CET a Sy HT ETA
is not grammatically incorrect, but is non-standard, because we
could instead say more concisely and clearly ;
OEE ITER FSA SIO SH SIM COTRICS GET ETH |
Or, aatcea wares c8-eEhntet coratcs orm Ere |
Or, 48 @ 998 ea ee e-eSrret CONN CFT EA |
Likewise, it’s redundant (« excessive) to say :
Sree ee CRS a Corea
We could, instead, say
weet AB ais Mrs |

in fact, “E51” means “te Hf" 1 So the one-word form “81” is
preferable to the two-word expression “7 7 1 In English, many
people often tend to make similar mistakes. Such mistakes occur
mainly with verbs, prepositions, adverbs, and noun phrases:* Now
well discuss them one by one.

Ss

Rs
A. Choosing the Right Word
in communicative writing such as letters, business reports, news,
articles ete.. you should always try to make your language as
simple as possible. And, most of the time, short forms of words or
expressions ensure simplicity, while longer ones make the lanquage
16 Eftective Wilting Sails For Advanced Leamen
Updated Bangla e-books(pdf): www.facebook.com/tanbir.ebooks
hard to understand. So, use one word instead of more where one

word is sufficient. See the following examples.

Wordy - When doing the cooking |s finished. call me

Short : When cooking ts finished. call me

Wordy : I'll make no comments with reference to that
matter.

Short : Ill make no comments about that matter.

See in the following examples how the one-word forms replace
the many-word forms.

Wordy > He talked in an unnatural way.

Concise He talked unnaturally.

Wordy : Tell me in a brief statement what happened
Concise - Tell me briefly what happened.

Wordy : She looked at me in a strange manner.
Concise : She looked at me strangely.

Wordy : This is a plant which is sensitive to light
Concise : This plant is sensitive to light.

Wordy ; | found that it was broken.
Concise : | found « broken.

Wordy ; He is a man who plays golf.

Concise : He is a golf player.

because
The project failed as-a-result-of-the fact-that the price of the
raw material went up.
how
Show me the -way-in-whieh | should do it.
All e-books & Software : www.tanbircox.blogspot.com
Comnctseanens Anel Stmaplicity liz

how to
Or, Show me the-wey-in-whiel+-should do it
so

She was ° angry te the extent that she shouted out loudly.

New-comers
—here-forthe-tiesttime find it difficult to

adjust to this climate.
Freshmen
People whe come “te cofegefor the first-time find it difficult to
edjust to the new environment.
a novice
its quite impossible for one-whe-is-4-new-to-this-trade to do
such a hard technical task.

Such a hard task suits best
an expert
a personwho “-is expenenced-tn this line.
not a novice
not one who ts 4 mew in this tine.
singers
Most “ peepleswhe-sing in this
composers
country sre people whe 4-compose-songs:

Gi
Her saree |s blue color. &

This mango is sweet to-taste: e

This work is too hard for me to-do

That bag is too heavy for me 4to-carry:, Please ask someone
else to carry it.

a
It will be “ an-eet-of political suicide.
118 Effective Salts For Leamners
Updated Bangla e-books(pdf): www.facebook.com/tanbir.ebooks

The is ima state.

Twenty years is a long peried-of time.

We walked on foot

We saw it with our eyes

[But “We saw it with our own eyes” is correct. because here
“own eyes” is used for emphasis.|

Barisal ts larmous for its ability te-grow rice.

He deals in the business-of rice.

He ts a tough kind-of man_

Our economy is now in e-state-of stagnation

This is on-eet-of utter cruelty.

There ts much hardship tvolved in it

There is some fault in the technique used.

employees
There are 200 * people employed in this organization

supported
They * were-supportive-ef me.

affect
This decision will have-an—-effect-on the profitability of the
firm.
ed. 2 the busi

Such environmental change will place the “business in-danger:

angered him
Her words excited him into anger

win
Well have “ the victory on our side.

supervises
He teemployed-for-the +-supervision-of the project.
cooks
She does-the--coehing for this family.
pleased me

His behavior gave-4-me pleasure:
He ts occupred ithe work-of making tea.

All e-books & Software : www.tanbircox.blogspot.com

Conctocness Mad Nimpdicity 119
B. Choosing the Right Expression/Structure

There are some expressions and structures which are rather too
wordy as compared to their alternatives. Such expressions are not
grammatically incorrect, In most of the cases they're not non-
standard either. But often their alternatives are preferred for the
sake of concision. For example. the sentence :
When they were tired, they went home leaving the work.

is neither incorrect nor non-standard. You can use such
constructions without any hesitation, but if it's in a paragraph
which is full of such constructions, then it may both look and
sound boring and monotonous. In that case this version is
preferred 3

Tired, they went home leaving the work.
Now see some examples.

Wordy - This is the game which they love most.

Concise : They love this game most.

[The wordy version is effectively used where some contrast is
made, as in—

This is the game which they love most, NOT that
of some emphasis ts required. as in—

This is the very game which they love most
But this sentence can more concisely be changed into—

They love this very game the most. ra
if. however, the emphasis is to be very clearly demongtited, then
this is often pref so”

We dads Gania thet they: Acassece | -

Wordy : There are many people who have not voted.
Concise : Many people have not voted.

Wordy : Those are the goods that have come from China.
Concise : Those goods are from China.
fective Witting Sails For Advanced Learners
sale Bande e-books(pdf): www.facebook.com/tanbir.ebooks

Wordy : This book is for you and that book is for him

Concise : This book is for you, and that for him.

Wordy « | went to Comilla and he went to Kurigram.

Concise : | went to Comilla, and he te Kurigram.

Wordy - While I was in the USA, | wrote this diary.

Concise - While in the USA, | wrote this diary.

Wordy : When you're in trouble. inform me.

Concise : When in trouble. inform me

Wordy = He was alraid and ran away.

Concise : He ran away, afraid.

Wordy : She sat down leaning against the wall: her chin was
on her palm,

Concise « She sat down leaning against the wall, her chin on
her palm,

Wordy : | ate my food ; she ate her food.

Concise : | ate my food ; she, hers.

Wordy : You'll sell your cow ; Ml sell my cow.

Concise ; You'll sell your cow ; I, mine.

Wordy = This liquid is not for drinking. but it is for use in the
laboratory.

Concise ; This liquid is not for drinking, but for use in the
laboratory.

[See my "Tough English Made Simple" and "Writers'
Grammar" for more examptes.|

The man whe-4s standing there is my brother.
The machine that-wes bought from China is working well.
Call the boys whe-are playing there.

All e-books & Software : www.tanbircox. blogspot.com
( crenteewnens Aanel Neorepalivaty’ 121

A
Berause-hewas afraid, he ran awey.
a
Having been thoroughly demoralized. the enemies receded,

___ bringing
This project has helped me very much (>) ttbrings- me Tk

4.000 each month.

It the clause “it brings me . . ~ is to be highlighted. or if it is of
the same importance as the main clause. then such change should
not be made to it.]

thinking

That accident set me starting -to think,

He was made to-eqtee to stop writing.

This plan is deerned4erbe likely to serve-to help cover the past
losses.

means

lt qoes“+to-mean that nobody will stend4to get the money

hock.

They soy that she doesn't deserve to-get such a big sabi
He must do the job-of making it possible-to rho stop

emoking

Now this family is in trouble. They had an engine-toat, the main
source of their income, but it went under water a couple of days
122 Eftectve Writng Skits For Advanced Leamen
Updated Bangla e-books(pdf): www.facebook.com/tanbir.ebooks
ayo. They had a dozen of cattle most of which have died. They had
an ancient building, which they built about fifty years ago—a
jong time indeed ; my grandfather was very young
then—but they lost it too during the Liberation War, How sad it

is to see good people in danger!

In the above passage the bold-faced part doesn't agree with the
rest of the paragraph. It, in other words, is totally irrelevant. The
inclusion of such expressions or sentences in any paragraph is

idered a major 4 on the part of the writer. Sometimes
even grammatical flaws in writing are overlooked, but such anomaly
destroys the unity of paragraphs.

ares o Ware eprarafs exe |
The above sentence is redundant. The meaning of “q##rfe" is
“wr wn". So, if the word “q72t4f" is used. the word “=raTa”™
becomes unnecessary or redundant. The correct sentence will be
2 Roe Gree eb |
or, 6 Weare qprergie xz)
In English, people often make such mistakes. “Return”, for example
means “to come back", and so it's redundant to say or write ;
Return back soon.
The correct form will be either
Return soon.
or,
Come back soon.
Here are some more examples of redundancy.
Redundant : The meaning of the word “ersatz” means
“not genuine”.
Standard . The meaning of the word “ersatz” ts “not
genuine”.

R The word “ersatz genuine.
All e-books & Software : www.tanbircox.blogspot.com
nunctierness And Smplis ftv 123
Redundant + The two twins are playing.

Standard : The twins are playing.
Redundant We adv. d/p ded/prog d

forward.

Standard  - We advanced.

Or, We went forward.

Redundant - This water is sufficient enough for the
production.

Standard This water is enough/sufficient for the
production.

Redundant < Let's join the two erds of the rope together.

Standard Let's join the two ends of the rope

Redundant - She has returned back.

Standard : She has come back.

Or. She hos returned.

Redundant Repeat again what you said

Standard Repeat what you said.

Redundant : This process is the s new i i

Standard This process ts the 2 ‘si i

[But “new invention” is a standard expression.|

Redundant « These two pictures are same identical.

Standard  - These two pictures are identical/same.

Redundant - The reason he died is because he drank some
polsonous liquid.

Standard : The reason he died is that he drank

$
Likewise, “the time when” and “the place where” are _peddundant
expressions. Ss

~~
C. Rewriting The Whole Sentence

it so happ that novice writers write one or more
wentences in a paragraph or essay so awkwardly or badly that, for
the sake of standard English. they need to be totally replaced by
fresh sentences. It's because those sentences don't aaree in mood

e

Effective Writing Sais For Actvonced Leornett
Updated Bangla e-books(pdf): www.facebook.com/tanbir.ebooks
or style with that of the other sentences around them, or
it's better and easier to totally change them than to improve them.
But whatever the reason. if such replacement is required. don't
hesitate to do that.

D. A Word of Caution

You must remember one thing concerning the expurgation (#7)
of unnecessary words or expressions from sentences - make sure
that the word(s) or phrasels) you call unnecessary ts really so. A
sentence may not contain unnecessary words only because it's
lengthy. Sentences ate often lengthened. ot words are often
peated, for the purpose of emphasis or other effects, In such
cases don't make the sentence short at the cost of its rhetorical
value. Just remember ; before chopping down any part from a
sentence make sure that it’s really unnecessary

All e-books & Software : www.tanbircox.blogspot.com
DIRECTNESS APTER
rae CHAPTE
CLARITY 8

There is no darkness but ignorance

— Shakespeare
A. What's Meant by Directness
and How Obscurity Occurs

B. Tactics for Writing Directly

Perectness And Garity 127
A. What's Meant by Directness and How
Obscurity Occurs

In the modern times, Shit tines sities sien caaatestbal arpa
language so that the readers can understand your writing very
easily, For this, you must think directly, plan directly, and write
directly. But what does directness mean here? It means simply
directness ; easily saying what you want to say. avoiding
unnecessary quibbles (ads exqits sere areegs 2 te781). Perhaps
you're thinking it's easy. But unfortunately it isn't. It's not very
easy to express thoughts easily, unless you've much experience in
thinking and much command over lanquage and writing techniques.

In order to know how to write directly, you must know before-
hand what obscures your writing. Insufficient knowledge of the
topic or theme is sure to make your writing obscure (88). So,
before writing, make sure that you clearly know what you're
writing about, Develop your idea well enough. Gather the needed
information and plan what information is to be used in what stage.
Aguin, insufficient knowledge of the lanquage and vocabulary may
cause unwanted (@@fg%) obscurity. So, learn the lanquage in which
you're writing. A good technique of avoiding such a problem is to
use the structures and vocabulary you know well, rather than
those about which you've doubt. If you consciously follow this
technique, there's every possibility that you'll make few mistakes.
Surprisingly, people who know English well also often make their
writing obscure and incomprehensible. It's because in most of the
cases they tend to exceed themselves, They just don't want to be
themselves. They feel so conceited that they think they
write better than they can. Consequently, they use tough words
and expressions deliberately to confuse their readers by their
“erudition” (feet). The result? Nothing but bid writing and
incomplete communication. Another major cause of obscure writing
is people's tendency to imitate (34424 =a) others. Some writers
want to follow the techniques of some famous writers. And,
undoubtedly, imitation makes people inferior to themselves. And the
result is obvious » they can never create their own styles in writing,
Ettectwe Seis For Leaner
Updated Bangla e-books(pdf): www.facebook.com/tanbir.ebooks

Mind you. unless you can perceive that-you're writing in your own
way, you can't write clearly and directly. So, observe others
styles, but follow and stick to your own. If, however, you musi
follow someone at least in part. then do it with care - learn his oF
her style very well until you think that the style is your own, not
his or hers. That is, you have to “naturalize” that writer's style.

B. Tactics for Writing Directly

Except for the above pieces of advice, there are some. specific and
pragmatic tactics for direct writing. Theyre enumerated as follows

Now we'll see how to use these techniques by way of some
examples,

In the event of your being afraid after you've seen the
dead body, never forget the fact that you should not
shout, and if you do, you will be more afraid as a
result of that shouting.

The above writing is clumsy, indirect, and as a result ineffective.
The writer has put his idea in a roundabout (¢7310) way. The
following version is far better than the above.

If you are afraid after seeing the dead body, don't
shout. If you shout, you'll be more afraid.
All e-books & Software : www.tanbircox.blogspot.com
\wevctoness And Charity 129

isnt the hatter version more direct and more effective? Surely it
is Now think why. Think!

This decision at last wax reached by them that they
should go to the cinema. But the necessary funds
could not be raised. At last | came to their help with
an amount of moncy of Taka S00.

Why has the writer used the passive voice unnecessarily, thereby
making the message indirect? The passive voice is needed only in
same special cases requiring indirectness and an impersonal tone.
Again. why has he used such a tautologous way of saying things?
Here, the expressions “I came to their help” and “with an amount ol
money of are excessive . they could easily be avoided. The
following version is really better than the above

At last they decided to go to the cinema. But they
couldn't raise the necessary funds, Then | helped them
with Taka 500.

Clearly, this version ts plain. direct. and clear

if you can de it in an effective way. you can give yourself
the assurance that you'll deserve to be paid more than what
you had an expectation for. Bui it is my belief that you
won't be in a position to be successful unti) you work in
an aggressive manner.

Now compare the following version with the above.

If you can do tt effectively, you can be sure that you'll, de
paid more than what you expected. Bui I believe that® you
won't be successful until you work seeressively. of

See tier clear’ Aivect the abn Wareiod te? Cipolla Wi
it so? Observe the use of the one-word forms of adverbs and verbs
instead of the many-word forms. Also observe how the
unnecessary phrases like “deserve to be paid” and “be in a position
to be successful” have been replaced or eliminated. If you find that
you fail to fully understand your own writing, then you should
IWS.
130 Effective Writing Sel For Advanced Learner
Updated Bangla e-books(pdf): www.facebook.com/tanbir.ebooks
suspect that such “clumsy” phrases may be there, So, edit your

writing and revise it.

May I draw your attention to the fact that there occured
an accident ut Shanti Nagar on April 28, 1997. [ hereby would
like © make some comment on the fact. I must inform
you that | was an eye-witness of i. T saw that the victim was
walking along the edge of the street, It so happened that o
truck then came over to the wrong side after losing control
and ran ower him,

Are the expressions “May |... | . . fact that”, “hereby”, “1 must
inform you that”, “I saw that", "It so happened that” really needed
to express the above message? Once you've said that you're an
eye-witness, do you then need to sy “I saw that. . .?” What
sense does “It so happened that” make here? Isn't “I must inform
you that” unnecessary? But unfortunately, many of us make such
foolish mistakes in our writing, We can avoid them easily f we're
conscious about them, Read the following version

There occured an accident at Shanti Nagar on April 28, 1997.1
would like to comment on it. | was an eye-witness of it, The
victim was walking along the edge of the street when a truck
came over to the wrong side after the driver had lost the
control and ran over him

Now read the following set of examples

Clumsy and Clear, Direct, and Comments
Vague (38) Tight Writing

Ww

This is @ letter (f may remind you You are sending a

intended to that) your account letter. So, you

remind you that | has become long dont need to say

your account has | overdue. that this is a letter.

become long For politeness, you

overdue. can use “] may
remind you that”. It
can be omitted,
however.

All e-books & Software : www.tanbircox.blogspot.com
(aretoee And Clarity

country.

The food is in the | The food is cooking. | Unnecessary words
process of being | So. you've to wait have been omitted
cooked. So, you for some time. | think] The expression
can't do anything | it will be delicious. ‘you can't do
without waiting waiting” is
lor some period of unidiomatic and
time. | think the roundabout, It has
food will be delicious been replaced by
to taste. “you've to wait”
| would like to take | | would like to Tautologous
the opportunity to | apologize for the expressions (he.
apologize for the damage done to your | unnecessary words
damage done to goods. From now on | and expressions)
your goods. Let well take care that | have been omitted.
me assure you such accident doesnt | The last vague
that from now on | occur again. expression has been
well be careful modified. Even, you
enough not to let should omit the
such accident clause “I assure you
occur twice. that” because the
assurance is directly
given in the
following clause.
Active measures Active measures are | If Uliteracy were
("08") are needed | needed to eliminate not. a problemcyss
to be taken for illiteracy from our wouldn't want: to
the elimination of | country eliminate a So, you
the problem of don't to label it
illiteracy from our as a problem.”

Effective Writing Sil: For Advanced Leamen
Undated Pangla e-boaks/odi\ wa facchook comiapbinehoaks

In view of the Because some of Vague and round-
fact that some of | them have offended about expressi
them have the p we { logies} have
undertaken to declare that they be | been edited out,
offend the found out and tried so | The direct verb
existing president, | that such behavior “ty” has been used
we hereby are does not repeat itself | instead of the noun
bound to declare in future phrase “the trial
that those who of

were invelved in the

said offensive

behavior be

searched for and

found out for the

facilitation of the

trial process of

them so that such

olfensive activities

may not gain the

momentum of

repetition in the

future time.

We continued the | We di dthe |U y and
discussion on the | voting right issue for | awkward passive
voting right issue | a long time. but could | clauses have been
for a Jong time, but | reach no decision omitted. The last
no final decision | That depressed us | sentence has been
was reached. However, we completely modified
That is what made | decided to discuss

us depressed in our| it further the next

minds. However, it | week

was decided that

the same issue be

carried forward

to the next week

for further

discussion.

All e-books & Software : www.tanbircox.blogspot.com

(heeds And (larety

133

Exercise gives us | Exercise gives us The double negative
the ability to work} work stamina. It also | in the last sentence
with stamina. It freshens our mind — | has been turned
alo makes our and invigorates our | into an affirmative
mind fresh and muscles. It is also said | sentence

gives vigor to our | that it helps us live a

museles. [tis also | longer and happier

sod by some life. This opinion

people that may be true.

exercise helps us in

having a longer

and happier life.

This opinion may

not be fully

untrue.

Did you read the foregoing examples attentively? And did you
compare the two versions of each example while reading them? If
you didn't, then please read them again. If you did, then also please
reread them.

The key to clear writing is revision. See how the following
passages have been revised.

rie coq HeeR =e are aarS wee A Gt ae pe Stars Swarts
wa fecrca fam ereon giocefees, coreg aie fees coxa coe wa
UTS Merrens 28 Aer we ace Grenihs save Says, Se “eet
ofa feteere Sy ere secs oie co AN ath weces ec otear
TSE Gee ca 2eiG fencne cre sare yess corel ZBre
va

The above sentence is wordy. In it, too many words hav been

used in a quibbling manner. What the writer wanted.t® mean is

this ; mS
ean aenteteennh tenons
oct ge Slee orale |

This version is simple. It’s better than the former, Notice that in
this case the whole sentence has been discarded ("@m™ =m Exe)
and a fresh one created.
134 Effective Witting Seits For Acivanced Lecenert
Updated Bangla e-keoks(pdf): www.facebook.com/tanbir.ebooks
diction ( dof following passage is pretentious
(34-29). The writer made it unnecessarily tough. He did
consciously because he thought such a diction would increase the
“literary” (nfefere) value of his writing. But has he been able to
achieve that goal?

Crees ale genes wl aie quire mel, ere wee) can fie
om afa af gy ei sae sa teers os orien Stree sfee
ear Fae) Cosas se Come OMTE | Geen cores oar, oe
sferen Are a 2e sapere apete WD ore ay Sy ae |
aare awe sites Ge afeece ote wie are eee cy Oy te
eres oeDtices ayer wie sree St aa, Sfeurtes Grose
Set Te Herts crereuce Fee SE SETS | eee, Heras, fas
eins erica “Sees ere3 wae Slew cress ae fe et
foe opie sara eet cae wa ah ayers Srey Sree mere
sereis artes sears sere core we ee ages fears |

How did you enjoy the above story? Did you enjoy it at all? Did
you qet the message? Actually. it's a very bad writing. There are
many irrelevant prattles (**#7f) in it. Also, the main message has
been given in a boringly indirect way. Now read the following
revised version.

34 ore sae a enfe 2s cefee Soe ered ce oe crm:
rata aif ae greet afecrett re sofas errs fafa »itesst
wares ; fefa aracs siteesiz fey fers fefeceieces | ore cee Se
fay asrety fers face Paps oe eceferra

Here are some more examples.

Pretentious and obscure Clearer
As | grew older and older, | As | grew older, I began to
became more and more examine more carefully the
interested in the various fields | relative advantages of various
of occupation and what they occupations.
had to offer me as far as
choosing a life's occupation was
concerned. :
All e-books & Software : www.tanbircox.blogspot.com

CM reR tines And Carrey

135

Our poverty alleviation program
ts not lacking in any way as to
its purpose of helping one to
prepare oneself for the
requirements of a happy future
economy

Qur poverty alleviation program
succeeds in preparing us for a
happy future economy.

After that event, | found myself
in a mood as a result of which |
had to walk out of the room in
which | so long was, but it so
happened that immediately after
my exodus from the room
those who are known as my
iriends followed me with the
intention to request me to
forgive them.

After that event | walked out of
the room, but soon some
friends of mine came down to
me to beg forgiveness.

Now another set of examples, This time compare the wordy
sentences with the respective economical [ie concise) ones.

Wordy

Conomical and Direct

| was born in Bhanderkote. It is
situated in the district of
Khulna.

1 was bor in Bhanderkate.
Khulna

business statistics, quantitative
business analysis, and

operations research

All of us should strive toward We all should learn good

the fullifiment of the desire of English.

learning good English.

In the way of business maths, | | took up business algebra.s*
took up business algebra. statistics, quantitative . Bisiness

analysis, and operations
research. <

| think that | believe, to some

extent, about the same as you

in your attitude toward capital
ishment.

| agree with your attitude
toward capital punishment,

Effective Vititing Suits For Advanced Leaner

136
Updated Bangla e-hoaks/ndf\:

nw facebook com/sanhir ehagks.

Dealing with the idea about

human nature in ancient times
and human nature today, | have
come to the conclusion that it
[ts about the same.

Human nature has not changed
during the centurtes.

In regard to his experience In
the job she is doing, it is
obvious that there has been no
change of any great
significance in it. It is a fact that
she has the stereotyped
persistency of doing what she
has learnt and it is surprisingly
true that she has not learnt
Lwhat_she has done.

There has actually been no
change in her experience. She
has done what she has learnt,
but she has not learnt what she
has done.

All e-books & Software : www.tanbircox.blogspot.com
SMOOTH CHAPTER
TRANSITION :

SHINY FLOW OF 9
THOUGHT

Careful and correct use of lanquage is a
powerful aid to straight thinking
— William lan Bearmdmore Beveridge
1, What's Transition
Il, Major Causes of Incoherence
Ill. Areas Requiring Transition
A. Transition Within the Paragraph
1. Filling a Small Gap in the Thought
2. Cutting Out Inrckevant Words
3. Leveling Sentence Patterns
4. Using Transition Markers
5, Using Reference
B. Transition Between Paragraphs
1. Backward Transition
2. Forward Transition
3, Mediate Transition
4. Both-Way Transition
5. No Use of Transition
6. Conclusion

Sweaty Tretresttiew - Stier Flow of Thought 139
1. WHAT'S TRANSITION?

tn CHAPTER-14 youll know that of the four basic characteristics
of a good paragraph. coherence is one. As you'll know, a
paragraph is said to have coherence when its sentences are woven
together in such a uniform manner that ideas flow smoothly
through them. Within a paragraph. coherence ts brought about by
linking each sentence with the one that comes alter it in a smooth
way so that nothing but the focal-theme of that paragraph
oceurs in it, Coherence, in this sense. ts maintained by
concentration ; avoiding irrelevant ideas or pieces of information or
filling in gaps in thoughts. As far, however. os an essay is
concerned, coherence refers to the smooth flow of thought from
one paragraph into another through the end, ensuring the
completeness of the universal theme. But how to make them—
paragraphs in an essay—coherent? There are some Besieeseny

The act of using such techniques to is
called transition. Transition, then. is a mechanism—how to make
houghts flow hly, while coherence is the result—what

happens, siter, that acharian: jee been -successtutly: ued, in other
words, coherence is the goa! to achieve which we apply the
means—transition. The fact that this chapter is about transition is
another way of saying that it's about how to maintain coherence
in a piece of writing. So, during the course of our discussion, these
two terms may stem to be identical. That shouldn't confuse you

So we can simply put it like this ; a

Transition is the process of using words _and/or
sentences in such a manner which builds bridges between
two different thoughts ensuring the easy and natural flow of
the idea through the sentences, or paragraphs.

Let's take an example.

Read the following passage and try to sense whether there's
coherence between sentences, especially those which have a
square bullet (Mi) between them.
40 Effective Writing Suit For Advanced Learnert
Updated Bangla e-books(pdf): www.facebook: RTS i i
Let good commin sense be your guide, @ You can succeed and
wes asd chine mexcqukiteitaeaten enh mtnren
be protected by it from insults—intentional of unintentional.
@ We can be raised to an attitude where the stones hurled
[ihrown) at us won't hurt as It becomes intelligence. Don't forget
that you have to have double intelligence if those who don't
have common sense are to be managed by you,

While reading the passage. did your own thought flow easily all
through? Didn't it get interrupted? Why shouldn't it. when the idea
of the passage itself doesn't flow smoothly? Let's explore it, then
First, the first square bullet (1). What's the relationship between
having “common sense” and being “successful”? It's not clear from
the first two sentences. If, however, we want to find a logical
relationship between these two sentences, we must halt for some
time and think twice, Thus we get interrupted | our mental
interpretation and perception lags behind our reading speed. Now
let's move along. Second. the third sentence, why is one portion of
it in the passive voice? There's an abrupt (23%) shift of voice (and
thus of the subject) from the first cause to the second. Such
inconsistency (S#¥fE) destroys coherence. But this is not all,
There are other disturbances. The third nuisance exists where the
second square bullet is placed. How can we relate the two
sentences? Fourth, what does “it” refer to? And fifth, why ts again
another passive voice at the end of the passage?

Now read the passage again and mentally detect the problem
areas, Since they've already been marked, just go through the
passage and become aware of the fact that some amount of
incoherence exists. Then read the following revised version.

Let good common sense be your guide, With the help of its
Hight, you can succeed and be happy and achieve your stated goals.
Good sense bs.curarmor-and cam protect, as from wnsults—
1 and ional. It can raise us to an altitude
where the stoncs hurled at us won't hun us. This good
common sense becomes intelligence. Don't forget that to
manage those who don't have common sense, you've to
have double intelligence.
All e-books & Software : www.tanbircox.blogspot.com

Snore FrIrETWON SONY Fesr og TooMger 14)

Now the passage ts coherent, And it reads far better than its
former version, doesnt it? The problem areas which caused the
incoherence may be called “transitional gaps~

By now you must be wondering how to maintain coherence in
writing. Well, by maintaining good transition; that is. by filling in
the transitional gaps. And that's what this chapter is about. But at
this stage we'd better see briefly why incoherence occurs in
writing.

Il. MAJOR CAUSES OF INCOHERENCE

Experience shows that incoherence is a result of several causes,
not past one of two. Of them the fullowing have been found to be
the major ones ;

@ incomplete understanding of the topic arising, in most of
the cases, from incomplete planning and idea development,
and leading to small gaps in the thought time and again and
to inadvertent (unmindful) inclusion of irrelevant words or
sentences:

@ insufficient knowledge of lanquage and writing techniques
and lack of practice in writing:

@ insufficient concentration on the “universal theme” as well
as each “local theme”. on how the “local themes” are
related with one another as well as to the “universal
theme”, and on how the ‘local themes” copabiped, a ue
to the “universal theme”; s

@ lack of revision alter the writing is over; &

e iictriplesa uindlesineidinig Ol’ whan 4o jputsiin aspect of ‘wh
idea in a different paragraph and when not to use a different
paragraph at all lie. incomplete understanding of
paragraphing), and

@ lack of Knowledge of how to maintain coherence in writing.
142, Effectwe Writing Skilts for Advasced Leamers
ipdated Bangla e-books(pdf): www.facebook,com/tanbir.ebooks
The causes—it's clear—themselves indicate how the
incoherence problem can be solved. Yet one suggestion may be
useful - Don't think in single sentences instead of in whole

At this stage you may not be in a position to understand how
all these causes are related with the incoherence hazard. Yet that
will not hamper your overall understanding of the issue. As you go
ahead, you'll see light little by little.

ll. AREAS REQUIRING TRANSITION
Perhaps you've already inferred that transition is required not only
within paragraphs but also bet them. The within-paragraph

transition requires us to take care that each sentence flows

hly into the following one in a paragraph, while the between
or inter-paragraph transition requires that we properly link the
“local theme” of a paragraph with that of the preceeding paragraph.
All through the following sections of this chapter, we'll discuss
these two areas of transition, present some related terms and
concepts, explain various types of ition. and il how
many techniques are there to ensure smooth transition in both the
areas.

A. Transition Within the Paragraph

Transition within a paragraph is maintained mainly in four
different ways which we'll shortly discuss. Not that you should use
any single technique at one time; rather, you've to apply them all as
and when required,

1. Filling a small gap in the thought : As you revise your
writing, you may come across some thought gaps in it. It may
have occurred owing to incomplete planning or carelessness or
some other causes. Whatever the cause. you've to detect such
gaps. Wf any. and fill it with the necessary word or words -

faqrerg! oo srqtt-seca Gere Sere, — ares age) He Ge Tea
mere srt eft wregh een sere: een srt ores ese ae |

All e-books & Software : www.tanbircox.blogspot.com
woueeh Teendtion  Sbviry Flow of Thought 143

ee wih way at a face, fey oe Serena Sone en ay eee wre
sr corn dre) ace coca sige oftes axa, om ace gf acm Here
ee wae serz— at wren feemrey acm Sree sta Scafem | Stet
wens wt ag ecafeern, ae TSE co EA fe conte, Geete
CONS 5 A Hs OF A —e Coes es Come!

As you went through the passage. did your thought flow
ontinuousty? H you read it carefully, you might come to a halt at
he beginning of this sentence ; “6t#" om®, . . what does the word
#0” reler to? The passage doesn't give the answer. Actually,
here's a thought gap here. This gap has been filled in in the
ollewing version,

Srecerg oe areal -mece Pee Sere, —erencs shglt, =e wee sty,

erect wreh— Gh argh ser sere; eae enh, sexe qairee

ayy | oe wight mn wee we fice, fey ue Serer Sys em at

Ta wre ore corey ate a8 ce ph ara afea a, enfrere anfirer,

witctae witete ere cere com, oe cota wre afta era, At ee

ys et weet ee wes sree — ct orem flere aH ee

Softee were Gres afe xs ecefeces, oe cet Ge gm fe

CSTE, AE GMS HE Bie HE Hs Cees WS Corea!

way ae gt

Now it's clear what “4t#” refers to ; it refers to the "Wa",
tecouse of its absence. the passage lost its coherence. Now
nother example.

Your eyes can help you in two ways : First, looking other people
in the eye says to them, “Tim confident.” “I'm a winner,” and 2
know what I'm doing.” I you dont look the ater person the
eye. the other will assume you're hiding something. ype mou
being honest, or you're weak and afraid

Perhaps the above passage reads qood Bia h cea besonde
Jearer and the thought could be made to flow in a smoother way,
lust think ; “Hf you don’t look the other person in the eye”. . . look
vhen? On what occasion? It's not clear. You've to quess it, But it
‘ould be stated clearly to ensure better coherence. Like this -
144, Ftfectwe Writing Skits For Acivanced Learvan
ipdated Bangla e-books(pdf): www.facebook.com/tanbir.ebooks
Your eves can help you in two ways > First. looking other people
in the eve says te them, “lm confident,” “Tm a winner” and “1
koow what lim doing” TP you don't look the other person in the
eye when you make a statement or make a request. the
other person will assume you're hiding something. you're not
being hanest, or you're weak and afrud
— Dr. Davad J. Sehwante

When you revise—and you must do that—your essay, try to
find out such small gaps in your writing. Then fill in such gaps with
the necessary words or sentence{s), Never make your writing
concise at the cost of understandability. The days of pompous and
deliberately tough writing are gone. Now simplicity is the best
policy in writing,

2. Cutting Out Irrelevant Words or Thoughts : Novice writers
accidentally include in their writing irrelevant (=2777%%) points or
words more often than they leave thought gaps in it. They move
on to a different point while dealing with a point. Then, after some
nonsense or irrelevant prattling. they come back to the main paint.
When » reader goes through that writing, he or she tumbles down
(21s3 1) at that irrelevant point. Let's take some examples.

Candor (3#9S1) is very disarming. Every negative statement you
make abou! yourself is instantly accepted us truth. Some people,
however, may not believe it. For they're so made, or
they don't have the heart to believe others. To be able
to believe is a great virtue. of course. However,
Positive statements. on the other hand, arc looked at as dubious
(eats, HEHEMRS) at best. So, it's a ged strategy w advertise
your product by candidly (F#*St2) saying that your product has
same flaws,

Does the bold-faced portion match with the overall theme or idea of

the passage? No. Read the passage mindfully twice or thrice. Youll

see it's completely irrelevant. Such irrelevant words, which arise

from weak and incomplete planning, must be edited out. Just drop
All e-books & Software : www.tanbircox.blogspot.com
Worth Pratresiticn « Sdeny Flow of Thosght 145

that portion off the passage, and then the passage will be
coherent. The smooth writing is this -
Candor is very disarming. Every negative statement you make
about yourself js instantly accepied as truth. Positive statements,
on the other hand, are looked at as dubious at best. So, it's a good
strategy to advertise your product by candidly saying thot your
product has some flaws.
Now an example in Bangla.
eon ade pee Se Shes Moa Sen el CI | OTR ST
Gem oft Sere aH) Er a) Se Se SSeSe AE SKS ae
coves aaa oy fee en | a et Ss Ee SATS Eee EE
carem Sea Sas Were SIM CS AE eS | CATE eB ot oD
fe, 0 are ee ae eee eee ee a) SEH ar See, aA
aeae Com Hey ON TS AT; Oy Sl SACS See eee | eT cers
et Hs crm oem: wha BfS ee cers 2h ott say oem) ot cara
ere Peg em, cee od ge ews eseree sey fern eg oH — a
weet ove Siem ee Sd sere Seg aca om fey eale weer
GES Stra SI |
The topic of the above passage fs loftly, no doubt, but the
writing lacks coherence. The sentences—"S2") So ysrrer . .. Sm
ONS BS NS Fi” doesn't agree (x “161) with the main point of
the passage. This portion of the passage is out of place here. The
coherent passage should be -
Om epee sare ase Sie Srey eee SNCS sa ENCE Fy | Crete wey
Om Sia Fare ey eu ae) cows oF ce Hew aie, ote
25H OATH MICS A) TA ZN FEST, 749 Ee wan em Can
CORA CS A, BY SWS Vet Sze aire care ae aie CoH;
Wt BE 7 Core hh ems eM vem | we CoAT Kare RB EM, oe
ww y beers yeaa we feo fq eae aeeet Bee
SSB sere Gey ace om fey arte samecn ore
— watty are orga
(slightly altered)
Incoherence of this type. however, arises because of lack of
unity of the piece of writing (See CHAPTER 14).
EWs—10
146 Effective Writing Siils For Advanced Leamern
Updated Bangla e-books(pdf): www.facebook.com/tanbir.ebooks
3. Leveling tence Patterms : incoherence caused by

sentence construction Is found in most novice writers’ writing.
They often think that putting an idea in grammatically correct
sentences is enough. Thus they don't care about wether or not a
sentence is in level with its preceeding one, As a result, they
unexpectedly (is) shift (change) subjects, the voices of the
verbs, and pronouns. The result ; lack of transition and coherence;
immature (#8!) writing.

Read the following passage with a critical mind. Try to find the
flaws. if any.

Pouple work for love and money. Few of us ever scem ty get
enough of either, There are no great behavioral science secrets to
good management. Hf top priority is given to supporting and
paying your people, you will be blessed with results beyond your
dreams.

Look at the last clause =. _ . you will be blessed... dreams. It
begins with "you", a personal pronoun used to directly address the
reader, But what about the “if-clause"? Why is it in the passive
voice? The awkward passive voice has created an unnecessary shift
hot only in the subject (top priority — you) but also in the verb
(active + passive), and consequently in the tone (indirect > direct)
The result is undersirable ; incoherence or lack of smoothness.
Also, such shifts are not correct according to standard Enalish
The revised paragraph ts =

People work for love and money. Few of us seem to get enough of

either, There are no great behavionil science secrets to good

management. If you give top priority to supporting and paying
your people, you will be blessed with results beyond your dreams.
— Jack Falvey

Another example.

Mikhail Gorbachey invited the Soviet citizens to think in a

different way. ‘How do you get people to take initiative,’ he was

‘quoted as saying, 'when they don't know the meaning of the word”

All e-books & Software : www.tanbircox.blogspot.com
veoth Freansitvons . Shévey Fone of Theateght 147

An enormous task faced him. He had to convince, change. oF
oust (G2 3 GM) the party th who Hed local
activities. The aticrnative was to bypasss (% S137u mt) them
and go directly to the people, People could only be convinced,
however. by being provided with bread today. rather than jum
tomorrow, If you change the physical things, it will lead you to
change the psychological things. which will change philosophical
things. Then perestroika would be believed by people.

Notice how the subject has been shifted from one sentence to
another in the above passage. It's hard for a reader to read such
writing with easy continuity of thought. Each shift (change) of
subject leads him or her to a different track (%*) temporarily, After
such a boring experience of reading, it becomes hard for the reader
to understand the overall (71f€%) meaning of the writing. But look
at the following version of the passage. It's coherent.

Mikhail Gorbachev invited the Soviet citizens to think in a
different way. ‘How do you get people to take initiatives’, he was
quoted as saying, ‘when they don't know the meaning of the word?’
Gorbachev was faced by an enormous task. He had to convince,
change. or oust the party bureaucrats who controlled local
activities. The alternative was to bypass them: and go directly to the
people. Gorvachev could only convince the people. however, by
providing bread today, rather than jam tomorrow. Changing the
physical things will lead to changing the psychological things
which will change the philosophical things. People would we
begin to believe in peresiroika,

a

=i Mishoces
Managing o daughter is a difficult task. Agreed. But, en people
have more fun in doing difficult things. And, you an do difficult
things in many ways—pleasant and unpleasant.

Experience shows that when you do the pleasant things
well in advance, you are less likely to have to do the unpleasant
things. Think about it.
sg, Ettective Writing Stills For Advanced Learners
pdated Bangla e-books(pdf): www.facebook.com/anbir.ebooks
How did the above passage read?

Notice : The passage begins with an impersonal subject
{Managing a daughter), The second sentence is a fragment
{grammatically incomplete sentence—used mainly in colloquial and
informal styles) with an impersonal (passive) tone. The subject ol
the third sentence is “people”. while that of the fourth is “you"
How inconsistency in using subject! But that's not all. Let's go
ahead. The subject of the first sentence of the second paragraph is
impersonal (experience), but why are the subjects of the second and
the third clauses of the same sentence “you"—a personal one?
Again, why does the passage end with an imperative “Think.
directly addressing the reader?

The writing {s completely immature (3151), It can be made
coherent and consistent and cohesive in various ways If. lor
example, you want to keep the personal touch, you can rewrite it

as follows :

Managing a daughter is a difficult task. Agreed. Bui then you have
more fun in doing difficult things. And. you can do difficult things
in many ways—pleasant and unpleasant.

It is my experience—and perhaps also yours—that when you
do the pleasant things well m advance, you are less likely to have
to do the unpleasant. Think about it.

This version is a good one. However, if you wanted to express an
impersonal tone. you could rewrite the first version as follows.

Managing a daughter ts a difficult task. Agreed. But certainly there
is more fun in doing difficult things, And, difficult things can be
done in many ways—pleasant and unpleasant.

Experience shows that when pleasant things are done well in
advance, then the unpleasant things are less likely to be done. It
deserves much thinking.

Now the above modified version is smoothly coherent. The
second paragraph, however, could be written as follows, obviating
(avoiding) the passive voice -

All e-books & Software : www.tanbircox.blogspot.com
wacatt Transition Shiny Foc of Though 149

Experience shows that when one does pleasant things well in f
advance, then he (onc) is less likely to do the unpleasant. This
fact deserves much thinking.

4. Using Transition Markers : There are words or phrases
placed at or near the beginning of a sentence or clause to signal
(he relationship between the new sentence or clause and the one
before it. These are called transitional markers. The commonest
of them are connectives like and, or, nor, but, for (because),
which serve as bridges. Over these bridges the reader can easily
pass from one sentence or clause to the next. Others—sometimes
‘alled transitional connectives—indicate the direction to which
the new sentence is about to move. These connectives thus
prepare the reader for what will come next. The commonest
lransitional connectives may be classified as follows -

1. To introduce an illustration : thus, for example, for
instance, to illustrate, to show some examples.

2. To add another point of the same idea ; secondly, in the
wecond place, next, moreover, in addition, similiarly, also, again,
finally,

3. To point a contrast or qualification : on the other hand,
despite ( + noun), still, despite this fact, on the contrary,
however.

4. To indicate a conclusion or result : in other words, as a
result, consequently, to sum up, accordingly, therefore, in
vonclusion, to conclude, and it followed that.

For more words and phrases of this kind, see CHAPTER 11.
The following example will show the necessity of the’ use,o
such transitional markers. &

We were tired. We could not work any more. Wesdient for rest.
After some time when we regained stamina, we resummed our work.
hh suddenly began to rain. We could not stop our work. The
manager wanted us to finish it within that day. After working for
some time, some workers stopped working. My friends and I kept
on doing it, We finished it.
Effective Si For Advanced Leamert
Updated Bangla e-books(pdf): www.facebook.com/tanbir.ebooks
The above passage lacks coherence. But read the following
version,
We were tired. As a result we coukd not work any more and
went for rest. After some time when we regained stannna, we
resumed our work. But it suddenly began to rain. Still we could
hot stop our work, for (= beacuse) the manager wanted us 16 finish
it within that day. However, after working for some time, some
workers stopped working. StHI/But we kept on doing it and
finished it.
Now this version of the paragraph is coherent. It's the transitional
markers that have made it so.
5. Using Referecne : Using relerence—especially pronoun
reference—is a very fundamental way of maintaining smooth
transition between two or more sentences, The following example
will illustrate the process.

Respect for your wife is very important when you want to
bring up your daughter well. | have found a simple way to respect
my wife. | have made a list of her good habits and practices. Of
course she had many bad habits and practices which “emerged”
after a few years of marriage. Then | became wiser and started
looking at the good things in life and ignoring the bad things.
Silence speaks. My daughters respect me for that, They alsa
respect their mother bacause | respect her.

—Promod Batra
All e-books & Software : www.tanbircox.blogspot.com
neath Transition. Shiny Bow of Thoegght 151
Together with such reference. sometimes purposeful repetitions
are made to strengthen the coherence. See the following example.

Once Akbar the Great was presented a bottle of perfume. While
opplying it, a drop fell on the floor, He bent down instantly and
rubbed the spot with his fingers. Suddenly he noticed that Birbal
had seen him and the great emperor was embarassed. Next day,
Akbar proclaimed in his Durbar that all the fountains in the palace
would be filled with the rare perfume for six days. But he noticed
that Birbal did not appear impressed. He beckoned Birbal over and
asked him to explain why he was not impressed by the generosity
of the emperor, After observing the court protocol, Birbsl bowed
low and whispered so only the emperor could hear him ; “The

respect Jost in a drop cannot be regained with reservoirs.” .
Se

B. Transition Between Paragraphs &

So far we've seen how smooth transition is maigisined among
sentences within a paragraph. Now we'll moveSn to a bigger
scheme ; how smooth transition is maintained between two
paragraphs. In the first case, we were concerned with the
transition between two sentences placed side by side, But in the
case of the transition between two paragraphs, it must be bome
in mind that they may or may not be successive (le. placed one
152, Effective Whiting Skis For Advanced Leamers
ipdated Bangla e-books(pdf): www.facebook.com/tanbir.ebooks
after another), A paragraph refers to that paragraph to which it
relates—no matter whether they're placed side by side or at
different places. Whatever the case, we'll classify the techniques of
transition in four broad classes. But before reading the following
sections of this chapter, you're required to read the chapter on
paragreph development (CHAPTER-14). Even if you've already read
that chapter. it's advised that you read it once more.

As I've mentioned, there are four broad techniques to maintain
inter-paragraph transition, Theyre discussed in the following
sections. :

1, Backward Transition : It seems to be the most frequently used
transition building technique. It's mainly used in short or long
articles and essays. In this technique the first sentence of a
paragraph refers to the “local theme” (or topic idea) of its
preceeding paregraph or another paragraph placed before it to build
a bridge or connection b them, C quently, as the reader
starts reading the paragraph, he or she easily understands how the
thought of the prior (7478!) paragraph flows into it, This technique
can be diagrammatically shown as follows

| y

ee )

—— 7

The above diagram shows that the beginning of each paragraph
refers to the content (shown by the arrow-head as the end) of the
immediately preceeding ({4*@!) paragraph. But it may have
variations. See the following :

All e-books & Software : www.tanbircox.blogspot.com
ett Travedtionr- Shiiry How of Thaaght 153

(remaats

=
es

[re aa
peor oa

As you can see, the fifth paragraph doesn't refer to the fourth
paragraph ; it refers to the first one. This is because the first and
ihe fifth paragraphs are coord (of equal rank) to each other.
The paragraph Nos. 2. 3. and 5 [counted from up downward) are
coordinate to each other but subordinate (of a lower rank) to
paragraph No. 1. Again, paragraph Nos. 6 and 7 are coordinate to
each other but subordinate to paragraph No. 5, The rule of smooth
transition ts that a paragraph can't relate upward to one which is
lower in rank (subordinate), but can do so if the upper paragraph is
higher in rank (as from the 2nd to the Ist or from the 6th to the
Sth). or can do so downward (see below), Such connectionsts made
by either using logical signposts (connectives such as° however,
consequently, again. on the other hand etc.) or repetitions, or
other ways of reference. Some examples will help us understand
the process easily.

Read the following article and observe how each paragraph
maintains transition by refering to the content of a previous
paragraph or by using signposts like first, second, etc.

154 Effective VWitng Sida for Actvanoed Leaner
Updated Bangla e-books(pdf): www.facebook.com/tanbir.ebooks
o New

Everyone knows the sad tales of companies that seemingly did
everything right, yet lost competitive leadership as a result of
technological change. Du Poot was beaten by Celanese when bias-
ply tire cords changed from nylon to polyester. BLP. Goodrich was
beaten by Michelin when the radial overtook the bias-ply tre.
NCR wrote off $139 million in electromechanical inventory, and
the equipment ty makeit, when solid-state pomtof-sale terminals
emered the market. Indeed. none of the leading vacuum tube
f in 19S7 ined as a comp force by 1977

These companies lost oven though they were low-cost
producers. They lost even though they were close to their
customers. They lost even though they were market-share leaders
They lost bevause they failed 1 make an effective Iransition from
okt to new technology.

These judgments, of course. are casy to make in hind-
sight. I's much more difficult to predict today what technologies
will dominate the marketplace five of 10 years from now. Even so,
there are some cCompanies—for example IBM, AT&T, Hewlett
Packard, Dow and Eli Lilly—which over the years have
persistently stayed at the forefront of technical change in their
industries, They may not bat 1,000, but their average has generally
been over HO, enough to put them in the top ranks. And they owe
their relative success fo a recognition of five realities of

i TT

ly based f
First, they recognize that all products and processes have
performance limits, and that the closer one comes to these fimuts.
wes tere waienty it becomes ty erent out the next generation
The higical winners therefore
pt systematic bale research to understand the limits of cach
technology. and when they sce that the limits of an existing
technology are being approached, they realize that greater
opportunitics may lic in.a completely different one.

All e-books & Software : www.tanbircox.blogspot.com
th Traaesttan : Sine How of Thought 155

The classic example of this kind of analysis occurred
when Bell Lacs recognized thut eh hy ! switehes could
never be made small cnough to produce really compact machines.
Mervin Kelly. then director of research at Bell. felt that a way
around the limits might be found in quantum mechanics and formed
the team that invested the transistor. A more recent cxaample was
IBM's effort. through its Watson Research Labs, to discover the
practical limits on computer chip density. This analysis of limits
had a major impact on the 43xx and 308% computer series.

Second, companics that stay ahead technologically take all
competition seriously. Normal competitor analyses seem to
implicitly assume that ewe reer seeanegnis will be the
ones with the largest In competition this
is frequently not the case. Texas Junereeehes was a $5 mullion to
$10 million company in 1955 when it took on the mighty vacuum
tube manufacturers—RCA, General Electric, Sylvania and
Westinghouse—and beat all of them with its semiconductor
technology, Bocing was nearly bankrupt when 1 successfully

duced the ial jet plane, vanquishing the larger and
more financially secure Lockheed, McDonnell and Douglas Corps.

Third, if there is substantial technical potential in a new
technology. you have to attack to win of even play in the game,
Attacking means gaining access to the new technology, traming
people on iis use, investing in capacity te use it, devising
strategies to protect your position and holding off on investinents
in mature lines.

Mest companies have a big problem with this approach,
arguing that they need to recoup their prior capital in ¥ mn
the old technology. But this argument implicitly assumes that the
customer will continue to buy the old product exe if it is tess
economic. This rarely happens. The logic is false. The returns will
not be made in any case. Du Pont fearned this when it cominued to
invest in nylon tire cords, only to be beaten by the smaller
Celanese, which was investing in the newer polyester cords. Lever
learned it in the detergent business when it was beaten by Procter

156 Effective Skit For Advanced Leamen
Updated Bangla e-books(pdf): www.facebook.com/tanbir.ebooks
& Gamble, which introduced the first synthetic detergent. Certainly
it is wiser to invest in assets that will make money rather than
reinvest in assets that will not make money.

Fourth, the attack has to begin carly. The substitution of one
product oF process for another proceeds at a slow pace and then
explodes—rarely in a predictable fashion. One cannot wart for the
explosion to vccur to react. There is simply pot enough time, BF,
Goodrich lost 60 percentage pomts of market share to Michelin in
four years. Texas Instruments passed RCA in sales of active
electronic devices in five tm six years.

Moreover, one cannot rely on economic measures of
performance for an carly warning. Frequently the market in which
the technohigical switch is taking place is growing, and the growth
covers up the decay, until it becomes catastrophic. Tracking of the
relative technical performance of the old and new approaches,
always mindful of the limits of cach, is perhaps the best carly
warning indicator one can get

Bell Labs recognized this when it saw the need 10 switch from
germanium transistors to silicon transistors in the 1950s.
International oi compames are beginning to recognize the need to
measure L eepr> Maca Progress as well as economic performance

f are observing that it is getting

oes: expensive to produce the ext generation of

if for example in moving from the 64K

rapdom-encens tefimory to te 256K: Thus we may see a slowdown

in the rate of introduction of “new” RAMs in the neat five years

and increases in other areas of technology—for cxumple, software
packages which use the RAMs.

Fifth, a close tie is needed between the CEO and the chief
technical officer to accomplish the necessary changes, Without
this, the leadership needed to translate ever-changing business needs
into technical programs and to adjust business strategies to respond
to changing technological possibilities will be missing. William
Baker, former president of Bell Labs, had this relationship with
several chairmen at AT&T; Ralph Gomory, director of research,

All e-books & Software : www.tanbircox.blogspot.com

voce Tromsition » Sine Alon’ of Thought 157

and Louis B b, chai of the cory thnical
committee, have it at IBM. Malcolm Pruitt. formerly director of
R&D, had it at Dow. But, Jing to the Conk Board. these

hips are the exceptions. Inthe U.S. today only one CEO

in five considers his top technical officer a part of the inner circle,
The US. js atop an exploding knowledge base. We arc well
Positioned to regain our lost international competitiveness if we ane
clever about our management of technology, Learning the
lessons of the winners is an important first wep.
— By Richard N. Foster in Wall Street Journal

Now let's look at the technique in a diagram. (See next page.)
Asis shown in the diagram. the paragraphs 1, 2. 3, and 13 are
coordinate (of equal rank). Paragraphs 4. 5. 6. 7, 9, and 12 are
coordinate to one another, but they're all subordinate to paragraph
3. Moreover, paragraphs 8. 10, and 11 are subordinate to
paragraphs 7, 9, and 10, respectively, This is an example of
Lecce transition : each paragraph says something in its

beginning to the « ity of its thought with its
sdaatniis “head-paragraph’ {ic. to which it is subordinate ;
paragraph 3. for ple. is the head-paragraph of paragraphs 4,

5, 6. 7, 9. and 12). The first paragraph just starts the discussion ;
we may assume that it refers to (builds a bridge with) the TOPIC.
Paragraph 2 begins with “The comp ~ referring to the
companies stated in the earlier paragraph. Likewise, each paragraph
builds a bridge with 2 previous paragraph (shown by the astow) by
saying something that refers to its head- -paragtaph (The
transitional words are printed in the diagram). Aled. look at the
signposts Second, Third etc., used as transition inarkers, The last
paragraph refers to alll the preceeding paragraphs.

If the author didn't use these transition markers, the essay
would lack coherence and consequently the reader couldn't easily
understand the overall meaning of it.

158 Etfective Writing Sails For Advanced Leaner
pdated Bangla e-books(pdf)}: www. facebook.com/tanbir.ebooks

=

All e-books & Software : www.tanbircox.blogspot.com
Sinoonl Transition . Shiny Flow of Thought 159
Another example.
Science in Everyday Life

Now we live in the world of scence, 9 world that man has renewed
and crnched with the contributions of sctenee for hundreds of years,
So, there js not a single day of our life which is not indebted to
science for its comforts,

Modern cittes and towns are established according to scientific
plans, The gargantuan buildings, charming parks, clectrieny, mulls
and factones—all these are created by science. Science has wught
us how to produce electricity from water, how to store the pictures
of moving phenomena into’a tape. how to keep sounds recorded,
how to talk with persons of distant places through po wires and so
on. Thus, if we have a closer look on life. we will sec that it is
full of contributions of science.

Communication is the nervous system of the modern world, I
includes transportation, mudio, TY, cinema, telephone, telegraph,
fax. wireless anil so on, All these mysterrous instruments are given
us by science. Now we can see or talk with people of far-off places.

Motor engines give animation to our modert age. There is no
machinery or mills or factories, or any modern working device, in
which motor is not used. And this is the most wonderful gift of
scienct. The discovery of electricity is of equal importance, Now
our town life. even rural fife Wo sume extent, is entirely indebted to
science for lighting, heating, and fanning.

Science has contributed much to facilitate and expedite the
preading of education. Paper, pap king machinery, ink. pens
printing press etc, are all gifts of science. &

Science has made the modern life comfortables ( ‘Cinema,
photography, radio, televisi ). fans and various othe? recreational
devices are given us by science. Now we can enjoy our life to the
fill; we can live an casier and comfortable life. The discovery of

dici xray, p devices, computer.
computer-programing methods—these all have made the modem
world » heaven, 0 10 say.

ee ae ee
a
160 Etective Sidi For Acvonced Leamern
Updated Bangla e-books(pdf): WWW. facebook.com/tanbir.ebooks
The di of the of science to vut life can

hardly be overstated. In a word, science has made us think

scientifically. Now we are scientific, rational beings All the

spheres of our family, social, political, business and intemational

‘life ane highly upgraded by science.

‘The transition plan of the above essay is shown in terms of the
following diagram.

1
je
|3
ove id
|s
16
|7

All e-books & Software : www.tanbircox.blogspot.com

ER anars

Veet Tremesdtion » Shiver Flow of Thovghe 161

This shows a fundamental paragraph development technique. All
joints (paragraphs) emerge from the TOPIC—an example of
‘divergent™ Paragieph devekipman: That's why each paragraph
starts ind ing only to the idea implied in the
TOPIC. No paragraph atiempts to build 's bridge with’ @’ previous
paragraph. In such essays transition is very simple - Only go on
writing with an eye to the TOPIC, and that’s enough, But how can
this be called an example of backward transition? — you may ask.
Well, that's because each paragraph relates upward to the TOPIC,
The following 's 4 very good example.
Traveling As A Part of Education

Education involves not only reading hooks and doing exercises, hut
also scquiring knowledge through doing something practically, In
other words, practical experience is a part of education. In this
sense, since traveling adds to our experience and knowledge base. it

can safely be considered a part of educath

In this ape aeytchnen Pistiartiectbilghg Ase t
roughly speaking. two purp and
Pleasure. But it must be calpain ‘that in in both the cases
Knowledge comes from traveling.

As far as the education-traveling nexus is ermed. we can

aver that traveling should be made statutory for students. If this is
done. then it will be a part of education. It has, however, a number
of benefits. These are emumerated below.

Firstly, what we learn from our texthooks needs to be
venfied in light of the reality, If this is done, then the prs om 9
carned from books becomes practicable. “= " Les ig, ed bg
achieved, then there must be sufficient a
such as education four or

Secaadly, there are. scune sphdects Which can man. be Ought
by of learnt from texthooks, Geography. history, and some
branches of science fall in this category of subjects: For the sake of
ee ee ne ee
p J to go on edu

fws—ti

wy is) -

o

Ettective Salis For Advanced Lecrreins
Updated Bangla e-books(pdf): www.facebook.com/tanbir.ebooks
jy, education without pleasure becomes. in most of the
cases, prosaic and ineffectual, The process of education in which
recreational facilities are in-built, therefore, prove 10 be most
effective.

‘The other side of traveling as a part of education should
not in any case be overlooked, That is, it involves the question—Is
it really affordable by the students of this country? The answer.
regrettably, wil] be in the negative in most of the cases, If
Iraveling is, for instance, made an essential part of education, then,
to be sure, it will be a great burden on the guardians of our
students. The consequence will be that only a minority of susdeots
will be able 10 avail themselves of the opp ity of
perfect knowledge on the related subject(s), while a majority of
them will be deprived of the opr ity. This poses a greal
problem on the decision maker as well as the whole educational
system.

But it is not that such a problem is totally unsolvable. Te
make the extracurricular activities like traveling more effective, it
should be programed in a limited way within a limited budget.
Also, educational institutions as well as the government should
come forward to help students in this regard with reasonable
amounts of financial assistance.

Therefore, it is advisable that all educational i
take sufficient care to include traveling in the overall educational
program ensuring the cager involvement of the majority of the
students.

Now see how the first sentence of each paragraph uses iti
with a preceeding one. (See figure in the next page.) The arrows
show which paragraph builds a connection with which paragraph.
The words which have been used to do the connection are given in
the boxes indicating the paragraphs.

So far we've seen how the technique of forward transition is
used to maintain coherence between paragraphs. You may have
inferred that you can use the diagram method in the planning
phase of our writing to ensure smooth transition. If you make such

All e-books & Software : www.tanbircox.blogspot.com
swmundl Transition « Aiere Floee of Thosrghe 163

The other side of traveling
Ti 1

® plan before you start writing, it will help you much in producing
good coherence, because such a plan will tell you in advange which
paragraph is to be linked with which paragraph. Ss

Ss Edfieard Traneition's Waele-sen that ied cen'ink a peregriph
with a previous one by using some reference-words at the
beginning of that paragraph. But we car also do the opposite : link
® paragraph with one that follows by using some transition words
at the end of the preceeding one. The scheme is as follows. (See
figure in the next page.)
been sat a9 oe you cin eaelly et
shpall LGN Sexaspaphe Raise a “cep "spk UP ea
what will come next. Sometimes, however, paragraph may say
what will come in a remote paragraph. In such a case, however, the
latter paragraph should mention at the beginning which above
paragraph it is linked with. In the first remote head-paragraph, for
example, may be used expressions like these ones :

In a later section we'll see that . - .

This point is delayed to be discussed in a later section.
We'll discuss about it in a later section.

This point will be elaborated later in the relevant section

And in the second paragraph we may use linking expressions like

As was said in an earlier section, . . .
As has already been said, . . .
This. . ., as you've seen, .

Such transition can be diagrammatically shown as follows. (See
the first figure in the next page.) In the diagram. the transitions
between 2, 3; and 3, 4 are examples of forward transition, But the
transition between 1 and 5 is an example of such “remote” forward
transition. In essence, in such “remote” transition, transitional
words (phrases or clauses or a sentence) are used in both the
paragraphs (for example, in 1 and 5). That's why it falls within the
“both-way" transition category. So, we'll discuss it later.

All e-books & Software : www.tanbircox.blogspot.com
Now for some-examples of simple forward transition,

Usually, the preceeding paragraph refers to the following one
saying words such as the following :

a . But there are
disadvantages of this method. which advantage
we'll now consider.
eee res
wa &
ee Ss
x
.

166 Effective Whiting Skits For Actvanced Leatners

But this is but (only) one side of the
coin. We've to consider the other side
too.

But we'll shortly sce that women are
no less responsible than men for this
problem

one side

the other side

men are

women are

As soon as the reader reads the last sentence of each paragraph
{as shown above), he or she can guess what will come next. Thus

his or her reading ts improved.
oth Teetesition - Shire Flow of Thought

fansite .
wip. faceboox.com/tan

..., det us then

167
J, jap oy fs Il ~
Ovr. ZOO0OKS

venture inte this mainfield.
—— i.
oo
examples,
s illustration
But why do such differences exist — diference
between men end women? shown and a
question posed
- en
a=
wi
romain Postrate
; answer, which ©
does not say
The

168- Effective Wiiting Skits For Advanced Lecrrers
Updated Bangla e-books(pdf): www.facebook.com/tanbir.ebooks

af
Bi: 2nd

L

,
3rd

Forward transition can be very effectively used in lengthy
reports, articles, speeches, and books. Especially in books and
reports, in which discussions tend to be lengthy, this technique carn
be used to make the readers comfortable. As the readers know
what they are reading Is leading them to what, they can grasp the
flow of thought easily. Thus they also understand the overall idea
very easily, This technique also helps the writer by leading him ot
her to the right direction, by enabling him or her to say the right
thing In the right time,

The introduction of a book and the preview of a report can also
be considered as forward transition techniques. They tell the reader
in advance which chapter of the book or report will deal with what
topic, thus preparing the reader in advance. Once the readers have

All e-books & Software : www.tanbircox.blogspot.com
Neecedle Cremations. Sdety Flow of Thought 169

on overall view of what will come neat in the book or in the report.
(hey can have a better “mental link” between various chapters,
ven, some authors give a chapter preview at the beginning of each
chapter. This rechnique also strengthens the coherence of each
chapter.

The concept of transition may even be extended to include and
wxplain the cross-references used in books or lengthy reports. This
book, for example, has used this method, though not to a great
extent. But this, however, is more of a nature of “both-way"
transition than of the forward transition,

3. Mediate Transition : This is a very good technique. Unlike the
forward and the backward transitions. in which transition is built
between two paragraphs by some words or a sentence, the
“mediate” transition is built by a complete paragraph called
transitional paragraph. The paragraph is often a series of
questions or a summarization. It's relatively small in size. sometimes
only @ one-sentence paragraph, The technique can be shown as
follows :

170)pdated Bangla e-books (pdiectwe Witiod Sex kes Adwontedieoren

In the above picture, paragraphs 1 and 3 are connected by the
transitional paragraph 2. It is called here “mediate” because it takes
its place between two paragraphs and helps the idea flow from the
preceeding one (here, No. 1) through the one that comes next
(here, No. 3).

The transitional or mediating paragraph does the above
function by explicitly (st) or implicitly (St* Zz) referring both
to the preceeding paragraph and to the following one.

Examples.

But customers in recent years huve come to expect moch higher
quality than ever before, Recognizing this, we decided several years
ago to analyze in detail our methods and the costs of achieving
goad product quality. To our surprise. we calculated that as much
as 25% of our manufacturing assets were actually ted up in
reacting to quality problems. Using assets in this way. of course.
drives up production costs and product prices, making us less
competitive. in a relative sense. than we could be.

Were we, then, doing a good job of producing
quality products at a fair price? And if we weren't,
were other American businesses doing any better? Was
it any wonder that U.S. industry was having its
problems?

As we thought ubout this problem, it became apparent that
we were facing an intriguing management challenge. With above-
average quality standards already well established at Hewlett-
Packard, it would be difficult to ask for better results. Yet it was
apparent that major improvement was needed for us to retain a
leadership position in the long run. Clearly, a bold approach was
needed to convince people that a problem existed and to fully
engage the entire organization in solving it.

— Jotm A. Young
President and CEO of Hewlett-Packard Co,

Here the middle paragraph is the transitional paragraph, As you can
see, it's a series of questions asked about what was said before and
they're answered, inthe, tater, part of the articles | ogspot.com
Wecceh Tretnaition » Sivey Flour of Thosgght > 171

Keeping this introduction to cultural norms and roles in mind, fet

Ws now consider, as an in-depth illustration, one cultural role on
which recently there has been much research.

— David G. Myers.

Psychology

Clearly, the above is an example of a transitional paragraph. The
muthor asks the reader both to “keep . . . the cultural norms and
toles in mind”, which he discussed earlier. and to “consider . . . one
cultural role”, which he'll discuss next. Such transitional paragraphs
are typical of textbooks and reports.

72 Effective Writing Skilie For Acivonced Leamert
Updated Bangla e-books(pdf): www.facebook.com/tanbir.ebooks

stories and novels,

2D Be

wast fee

All e-books & Software : www.tanbircox.blogspot.com
Catal

This type of transition occurs in stories or novels full of suspense.
lt pot only acts as a transition builder, but it increases the reader's
attention and interest too.
Effective Writing Sais For Advanced Leamern
Updated Bangla e-books(pdf): www.facebook.com/tanbir.ebooks

necessity of

4. Both-Way Transition : In this type of transition there is a
two-way communication between two paragraphs. That is, the
upper paragraph says what will come next. and the lower one also
refers to what was said before. If, however. the two paragraphs are
placed one after another, then such a transition looks and sounds
redundant (2S), because only one reference is enough—vither
forward or backward. But it doesn't sound or look redundant when
the transition is built by asking a question at the end of the upper
paragraph and answering it in the lower one. Like this (the first
figure in the next page) -
All e-books & Software : www.tanbircox.blogspot.com
tds the readers’ mind to the answer that follows, and the answer
eninds (4 ee Gf) them of the question that was asked.
chnique is used where the answer desrves (Wf ate) a
wragraph either for its importance or for its size (in
vords or sentences) or for its different nature from the
saragraph's local theme. Let's see some examples.

“Ti

Your phone and the call is

?

iH

i

Effectwe for
pdated Bangla e- booksipaly, www.facebeok.com/tanbir.ebooks
Look at the question placed at the end of the first paragraph. Its

There are several reasons. The first
Wires gee ot

David G. Myers,
Psychology

"Thus they worked |
on and off, but were not successful.

But why?

All e-books & Software : www.tanbircox.blogspot.com
Wiiendl Jretrasitions > Shey Flow of Thexegh

177

Sometimes the question is posed but the answer ts not given.
Instead (2% 50), some comments on the answer or the question

\tsell are made. Here's an example.

—Peter F. Drucker

As we saw in the discussion of forward transition. both way

transition can be possible between two paragraphs wich aren't
taced one after another - rather. there's a distance ofc%one or more

paragraphs between them. In such a case, the

+ paragraph

just mention what will be said and where, and the lower
fwregraph, likewise. should refer back to what was promised in that
lotegoing paragraph. See the following (figure in the next page) -
Upahted Ee gla e-bookSquaiis poimtedoaisdink.com /tanbir bbooks
Ss an earlier section, . . .

Such reference is used when one relevant point comes in the
discussion of another point but which deserves special treatment

here else. In c jon, we use such cross-reference
when we move aside (digress) from the moot (main) point into
another supplementary (7@RF) and relevant (€7f%%) point and
when we come back to the moot point from that less-important

Now a word about that question-answer both-way transition, Ii
both the question and the answer are used in the same paragraph
and they're placed in the beginning of it, then it builds a backward
transition, and not a both-way transition, See the following
example,

in 1 D 1

www. faceboor.com/tand:

All e-books & Software : www.tanbircox.blogspot.com
Senealh Tremsition : Shiny Flow ef Thowght 179

Too often such a person's follow-up memo will read like this : “Re
: aur telephone conversation of July &, final sales totals for the
Quarter ending in June are enclosed herewith. A planning conference
for all sales p 1 will be scheduled for the near fiture and
these figures will be discussed. It is hoped that all district managers
will be aware that the figures are such that_reductions in the total
number of retail units may be indicated. Thank you for your
cooperation.”

Why does the man who seems so direct and clear
on the phone make himself sound mechanical,
pompous and stilted in his writing? First, he is probably
insecure about his writing skills. He doesn’) trust his own use of
language cnough to write naturally. And he thinks that somehow
jargon, wordy expressions, the passive voice and pully sentences
will make him appear more educated or more polished than he fears
he really is. Second. he may be under the impression that business
writing is supposed to scem stuffy, roundabout, and impersonal
since so many of the memos he gets read that way. Finally, he
may be timid about putting certain information—in this case bad
news—too bluntly, especially in writing.

—Jobn Louis Digactani,
Wall Street Journal

Also rernember that all questions are not asked for building
transition. They have other rhetorical purposes. It's not hard to
find out which question serves what purpose.

Another thing. The use of, for example, “As I've said.” “As has
already been mentioned” and such other clauses doesn't necessarily
mean that it builds a both-way transition, because things Bentioned
earlier may be referred to later at any time in any paragiaph even if
it was not said earlier that they would be discussed dater. In such a
case, it's only a reference amounting to the ‘result: made by
backward transition,

5. No Use of Transition : Not that transition is easily seen in all
hinds of writing. In some writing it may be implicit. or felt, while in
others it may be explicit. or seen. Even in the same essay. it may

180 Effective Whiting Skills For teomern
Updated Bangla e-books(pdf): www.facebook.com/tanbir.ebooks
pot always be visible. After all, “art consists (FES) in concealing

(Onterea a) art.”

Nor is it necessary that you use transitional words in all kinds
of writing. In writings in which thoughts flow through events
("54)), as in stories and novels, and not through logic or mere
words, verbal transition may not be necessary. That's why we
hardly ever see any transitional devices in fiction. See the following
example. The transitional phrase “Having crossed the river” could
be omitted from the sixth paragraph without hampering the
continuity of thought’ However, the last sentence of the second
paragraph has served as a transition butler

1 was only nine then, 1 went to my aunt's home with my father to
spend the summar vacation there. My mother did not go with us.
My aunt's home was about cight miles away from ours On that
southern region of the Khulna district in those days there were only
two meats of casy Communication —launch and boat. So we got
on the Launch around four o'clock in the afternvon and reached there
around sever But as soon as | stepped on the premises of my
aunt's house, | had an alien feeling: everybody seemed to be too
peculiar and undesirable te me, Though they received father and me
cordially, they seemed to have treated me somewhat indifferently. |
knew nutwady. It was the first time | visited their home, Besides.
never in my life had T lived a single day without my mother
Therefore. just then 1 was missing her the most, And after some
time | grew so desperate that | made up my mind to flee stealthily
from there and return heme to my mother And se I did.

It was about 8 p.m. when | ran away, But how to return now?
There was no lownch of boat at night. Sof had to start walking. I
did net know what way fo walk to return to our village [| was
scared. But suddenly an wea came to my mind : there is a big road
along the bank of the river along which we came here by the
launch: | night well follow that way. So 1 started watking as fast
as T could along that mad, On my way home, I met many people
returning home from the nearby village market. Their unattended

saved me from getting figitened. But as ill tuck woald

All e-books & Software : www.tanbircox.blogspot.com
watts Transition : Shiny Flow of Thougts

have it, soon the road was lonely. A weird ppc silence occupied
everywhere. Time and again gusts of wind Mew above the wide
endless field, creating ap unfamiliar whistling sound. At times
small whirl-winds splashed the water in the niver at my nght side.
It seemed that | was awaiting some undersined event. And this kept
me in such a suspense that at times I was startled by tiffling
sounds floating around me. All of a sudden I stumbled on a heap of
mud, The whole inner self shook in: me. 1 was ponalized with fear,
expecting some huge-bodied ghost standing before me.I hardly
dared to lift my head up. But alter a while, feeling sothing around,
I got up an my feet and resumed my walk.

ican not clearly remember how | crossed the open field and got
to the nearest locality. Perhaps 1 was in a paroxysm of some
strange feeling that was cating into my nervous system. But as far
as Tcan remember, | always thought about my mother.

As I was walking along the boulevard of the locality. 1 found
# more difficult to advance as fast as I did before, there being very
scamty moon-light. The road-sides were crowded with hedges and
trees of various sorts, which seemed to be a frightening reservoir of
uncanny darkness. Night-birds and wild animals were rustling in
the bushes, and het-headed dogs were barking af unidentified
sounds. Their sudden harsh barks caused quakes in my thrid heart,
Many @ thorn and sharp-edged thing got stuch into the Mesh of my
leg. But there was no time to pay attention to it. I did not even
have the mood to scrutinize whether there was bleeding in the legs
or not. At last I arrived—God knows how—at the "kbeyaghar”.
Now | was happy as a lark. Only to cross the river. and | go to
mother! Ah, Lam successful at last! But alas! How could 1 egos
the river? No boat was scen in the river, I was anxious. Will all
my attempts end in smoke at last, then? I sat down onthe grass,
looking far away in the river. To my great surpsive, I saw ao
fishermen’s boat sailing toward the east. They would pass by me,
and | would request them to do me a small favor, They helped me
alter much hesitation. Thanks to them. anyway.

Having crossed the river, as [ wos walking along the well-
known road of my own village, | seemed to have been flying into
Effectve ‘Shits For Acivanced Leamers
Updated Bangla e-books(pdf): www. ik ancien
the air as lightly as a lonely cloud. Now my heart was totally
disburdened, heartbeats better than normal. “Ill give mother a
surprise.” I thought. 1 was trying to reproduce in my mind the
adventurous story that I had just created so that | could tell ber
everything with great confidence. As | was walking thinking and
Planning this, all of a sudden a dricd branch of a large banyan tree
fell with a deafening hang on the ground én front of me. I felt as
though | had been thundered. | started my walk again.

At hest | reached home, trembling. | was wet from excessive
sweating from head to foot. A senior servant of our home opened
the door. He was taken completely aback at my arrival. “Moter!” 1
called gaily. But that old servant promptly said, “When you had
gone away with your father. your mother became restless for you,
She sturted weeping. She was missing you. And at last...” “At
last? What happened?" [| asked him in one breath. To that he
replied. “At last she started for your aunt's home with your elder
brother.”

5.M. Zakir Hussain,
Selected Essays

6, Conclusion : Which type of transition should you use in
your writing? Actually, if your writing is comparatively long. you
can use a variety of these types. There's no hard und fast nile in this
regard, [t's a matter of choice, need, and harmony. At best it can be
said that the presence of mediate transition in the writing tends to
increase its readability and beauty if the picce of writing is long
enough.

All e-books & Software : www.tanbircox.blogspot.com
WRITING THE
MODERN CHAPTER

WAY 1 O

The two most engaging powers of an
author, are, to make new things familiar
and familiar things new

— Samuel Johnson
A. Introduction

B. Avoiding Cliches

C. Avoiding Sexism
Writing The Mociern Wry 185
A. Introduction

Pethaps nothing is modern in the long term. So-called modern
things become old over time. The concept of modernness itself
changes, even. Only what doesn't change § the past. So, why aim
for the vaque modern? What's meant by modern way of writing?
Such questions mal be raised. The answers are also vague. no
doubt. Yet, so long as we can identify the past, we can
distinquish—if not acutely—the present. And the present, which is
4 product of conscious efforts and which is a result of evolution, fs
the modern. So. the modern should always replace the old, The
modern is always fresh because it continuously modifies ifself and
adjusts itself to the present, So. simply. today we should follow
today’s style, and tomorrow tomorrow's.

But what's today’s style? It's difficult to answer in specific
terms. Yet it can be said what it's not. And this is what we'll discuss
in this chapter. We'll simply say what we should not use in our
writing.

Lanquage is like a living being, which lives in the present, moves
toward the future, and rejects the past.

In our writing, we should reject the style and usages which are
no longer considered acceptable. Two things, for example. we can
do to make our writing up-to-date -

@ avoiding clichés, and

@ avoiding sexism.

In this chapter well concentrate on these two points.

B. Avoiding Cliches 3

Ciche's ate’ expressions which were once coloril and qaliinal but
have been used too frequently and thus have Jost all shir newness
and effectiveness. They're akin to platitudes. bits see some
examples.

In poetry, “a8” has been compared to “St for hundreds of
years. So, the simile (fafafe—Sra)) “Seve TE gx" doesn't arouse
(@0tZ41) emotion now, nor does it attract us in any way. We can
say this expression in describing some face or in telling stories to
Effective Writng Siilts For Advanced Leaner
Updated Bangla e-books(pdf): www.facebook.com/tanbir.ebooks
children, but we'd better not write it—especially in poetry, It's a
cliché—especially in the world of literature. Likewise. ;

xferez (Get) TS Oe
Fe wana SH

wee Se

Sao

all these are clichés to a modern poet. A woman described in these
trite expressions will not attract us any more.

Every expression which is d in a particular field becomes
a cliché in that field. Consequently, there are cliches in almost
every field of knowledge and work—in business, in film industry. in
games and others. Some clichés of the English lanquage are a4
follows.

as gay as a lark
All e-books & Software : www.tanbircox.blogspot.com
as light as a feather

as luck/fate would have it
as sure as eggs is eggs
at the end of the day

at this point in time

at your peril

avid reader

beavering away
between a rock and a hard place
beware the Greek bearing gifts
188 Effective Wilting Skits For Advancect Learner
Updated Bangla e-books(pdf): www.facebook.com/tanbir.ebooks

to book
bruising battle/encounter
traffic jams
burden of proof
but | digress

Call of the wild

call the shots/tune
callow youth

calm before the storm
came in from the cold
camp as @ tow of tents
captive audience

card up his sleeve

cards stacked against
cardinal sin
carrot-and-stick treatment
carte blanche

cast of thousands
cast the first stone

(given a) clean bill of health
catalogue of misfortune/misery
cat arnong the
Catch—22 situation
catholic taste

All e-books & Software : www.tanbircox.blogspot.com
Writing
The Mextorn
War

uf
1

fF
4
1
M4
(the) final insult ;
Updated Banglagg;bagber ebm w-facebook.com/tanbir.ebooks
finger in every pie

Hand-to-mouth existence
happy

happy medium
happily/comfortably ensconced
faving said that

hear and soul

Hi-gotten gains
i-starred ventur

All e-books & Software : www.tanbircox.blogspot.com
Fee
Hf
i

EERSS
ik
§

LEE
i

ee
nd se Soma Ss
or mai (worse still, not an _seinsed
reumlocution, P.
cia ol ks end
more honoured in the breach than in the observat
more in sorrow than in anger
more sinned against than sinning
mort up to the
Updated Bangayge! sachets facebook. com/tanbir.ebooks

much-needed reforms

Necessity is the mother of invention
no peace for the wicked

not @ scrap of evidence

not to put too fine a point upon it
Offer he couldn't refuse
older and wiser

olive branch

one fell swoop

operative word

own worst enemy

pure as the driven snow
(when/if) push comes to shove

silence
rings a bell
roll out the red carpet
tose between two thorns
(one) rotten apple in a barrel
rulfled feathers

Sale of the century
search high and low
seething cauldron

set in stone

shake the dust from their feet

All e-books & Software : www.tanbircox.blogspot.com
erty The Modern Way

shot across the bows

simmering hatred

skin of our teeth

snatch defeat from the jaws of victory
snatch victory from the jaws of defeat
solid as a rock

steady as a rock

air up a hornets nest

straight and narrow

strain every nerve

strange as it may seem

strange to relate

strapping great fellow

straw that broke the camel's back

strike a chord

stulf and nonsense

sulfer in silence

sulfer fools gladly

sugar the pill

Tarred with the same brush

technological wizardry

tender mercies

there. but for the grace of God

this day and age

thunderous

time files eo
time heals all ilis/wounds &
time waits for no man Ss
{in a) time warp Lee

193
194 Effective Whiting Sih For Aavanced Leamen
Updated Bangla e-books(pdf): www.facebook.com/tanbir.ebooks

too many
torrential rain

practice to consult such a list or dictionary while editing or revising
the writing to ensure that such worn-out expressions aren't used
frequently, if ever.

So, should such expessi die d?—you might ask.
Actually, they're already dead. Yet it's not that you can't use them
at all, You can. Sparingly. And it's best to limit their use in
conversations in stories, novels, dramas. and cases.

One interesting point. Those whose mother tongue is not
English or those who don't learn English as the first language can't
perceive these expressions as clichés. To them such expessions
don't seem to be old and colorless. In other words, they can't
simply understand that these expressions are clichés. It's because

there ts nothing in clichés to be understood: rather, theyre to be
All e-books & Software : www.tanbircox.blogspot.com

Writing The Modern Way 195

felt and experienced. |f something is not used at all, how can it
be overused? So it's best for non-English-speakers to roler to lists
lke the above one or other dictionaries, to ensure that clichés don't
creep in while they write something,

With time and owing to too much use. proverbs, epigrams, or
other pithy quotations also become cliches. The following are some
examples.

Fools rush in (where angels fear to tread.)

Lend me your ears.

Damn with faint praise

To be or not to be, ete,

Many formats ond patterns of letter-writing and of public
speeches have become clichés. For example -

wefaits sre soeis fe Rare spre 08 on, eapces ote se re
SEHISr, Sere errs fran oe Ree EE

‘STeeH Wrst « onig® , ores are wen era;

ars SEES re area HE Se aT

aes meh seers aren TESTE

eafa ora ee) are Aries were IE AT: (in speech)

Your letter is to hand.

| beg to state that ., .

| have the honor to state that .

We attach herewith _ .

May | draw your attention to. . ,

This |s to notify all concerned that .. . x
I remain Sir. .. &
This is to certify that... S
We, therefore, hope and pray that... e
With due respect and humble submission we beg to state
Under these circumstances . . .

No more today.

1 solicit the hospitality of . . .
196 Effective Sets For Advanced Leaner:
Updated Bangla e-books(pdf): www.facebook.com/tanbir.ebooks
These expressions have lost their newness and strength Now
taking a “typical” old-modeled letter in your hand. you can easily
say (without reading it) what it begins and ends with. That means
the format has become a “type” and so it's predictable. And
predictability of a piece of writing is perhaps the worst flaw of it (if,
however. it's not a routine work quided by a “prescribed” format
such as memos, audit reports etc,). So, it's better not to use the
above expressions in letters. Find out other ways to begin and end
your letters. (You may, among other available books, consult

"Writers’ Grammar" by this author.)

The way you begin your letter, essay. or story can also be
trite and as such can be called a cliché. Those days are gone when
most stories were written with a beginning of this kind -

as CRC FH 0s ITF |
Once upon a time .

Stories for children are still being written with such @ beginning.
but it's limited fo that purpose only. Again. letter-beginnings like the
following are clichés :

We, the students of .. , beg most .

We, the inhabitants of . - -

Take my cordial love . .

Thank you for your letter.

Today I'm writing you with a heavy heart.

| received your letter in time.

Tam very glad to receive your letter on. .

In response to your advertisement published in _ . . dated

With reference to your memo No | .

True, no cliche has been used in these beginnings. Why should
we reject them, then? Asa matter of fact, we should reject them
simply because the types of the beginnings have become clichés.
Hundreds of thousands of letters have been and are still being
written with such “typical” beginnings. So, it's time we rejected
these patterns. Not that you can't use the above sentences in your

All e-books & Software : www.tanbircox.blogspot.com
Writing The Modern Wity 197

letters. You can, But why in the beginning? Use them if you will—
but somewhere else. not in the beginning.

Student essays also tend to be “patterned” in the beginning as
well as in the ending. Most often it’s found that if students are
asked to write an essay on any topic whatever, they start it off
with a definition. But why such typed beginning always? There are
some scientific and objective cases needing such a begitining. True.
But those special cases should not govern all other cases.

As with the beginning, so with the ending. Most letters end
with -

No more today.

I/we, therefore, hope and pray . . -

I shall be obliged if you . . .

So, that's the end of the story.

Thanking you in advance... ;

These expressions are used all too often. So, it's better not to use
them frequently, if ever

Like phrases, expressions, beginnings, and endings, ideas also
can become clichés. And they do! So, watch out! Your greetings
can also become clichés. So, be careful, Your manner of speaking
and presentation can also become clichés. So, judge yourself, Judge
others. Even, judge your judgments!

C. Avoiding Sexism

Read the following examples.

Everybody should do his duty here.
EI a eae RE NPL ELT Bk CRE tans
it didn't sell good. is

Give the player this jacket when he wants it,
In the above sentences, the words “everybody's “writer", and
“player” can refer both to a male and to a female person. As far as
sentences like the above are concerned, it’s clear that the speaker
of those sentences talks of all—of men and women. Yet the
pronouns that follow (his, he) restrict the reference only to the
male sex, Then. there's a communication gap. For example, when
Eftectve voining Slims For Advonced Learner
Updated Bangla e-books(pdf): www.facebook.com/tanbir.ebooks

you say “Everybody should do his duty,” then. if they all are
obedient and dutiful, each of them will do his duty—except the
women, if any. And why should they? You've used the masculine
pronoun “his.” As.a result, the women may think theyre excluded.
And if they neglect your instruction. you cant blame any of them:
all you can do is just blame the English grammar,

But in the modern times this convention (of pointing to men as
well as women by masculine pronouns in such sentences) of
grammar has been challenged. Now, in most of the cases, the
demand of the time is that masculine pronouns should not be used
to point generally to men as well as women; rather, it’s preferred
thal “nonsexist” words be used.

But how can it be done? There are several ways that are
followed to avoid such male-domination in English. The following
sections will illustrate the techniques.

@ Reword the sentence if possible.

Examples :
Sexist Nonsexist

1. Many student pays Tk. 1. Any student who pays Tk.
S00, he ts given a ticket. 500 is given a ticket.

2. When a player breaks the 2. A player who breaks the
law, he sheaild be under law should be under trial
trial.

3. If a customer does not get | 3. A customer who does not
good service, he may not get good service may not
com again for service. come again for service.

@ Make the pronoun reference plural if it doesn't
change the meaning of the original sentence,
Examples :

Sexist Nonsexist
1. If anybody gets hurt, take | 1. If people get hurt, take
him to the nearest hospital. them to the nearest

All e-books & Software : www.tanbircox.blogspot.com
8 ting [be Modern City

Ww

Sexist

Nonsexist

2. We give a customer what
he deserves.

3. No officer shall leave his
office before five.

4. Ha reader doesn't find the
beginning of an essay
attractive. he is Iiwly to

2 We give customers what
deserve.
3. Officers shall not leave
their offices before five.
4. W readers dont find the
beginning of an essay
attractive. they are likely to

throw away the essay.

throw away the essay.

@ Use neutral pronouns where necessaty.

Examples :
Sexist Nonsexist

1. Hf any player gets hurt. take] 1. If any player gets hurt, take
him to the nearest hospital him or her to the nearest

hospital.

2. Wa reader doesn't find the | 2. If a reader doesn't find the
beginning of an essay beginning of an essay atira-
attractive, he ts likely not ctive, s/he is likely not to
fo continue reading the continue reading the essay.
essay.

3. Hf anybody is wrong in 3. If one is wrong in
something, he should admit something, one should
i. admit it

fy this regard it should be remembered that the frequent use of “he
or she” or “s/he” looks and sounds very awkward. So, care should
be taken in their use. For example, sentences like the followigg one
should be avoided e
If any customer wants to return the goods he/she boughs frum our
shop, tcl him/her that we will take it; bat we Pe not give
him/her the money back

To avoid male dominance, the modem usage requires you to
avoid words ending with “man” such as chairman, postman,
milan, salesman, cameraman etc. Though a female person has
no objection to her beina a woMAN. she’s likely to be offended if
Effective Writing Stills For Advariced Lecrwers
Updated Bangla e-books(pdf): www.facebook.com/tanbir.ebooks
such words are used to refer to both sexes in These

are now avoided in several ways Instead of, for example. saying.
"Mrs. Khan was the chairman of the meeting” we can say, “Mrs.
Khan chaired the meeting’. of “Mrs. Khan was the
hy /moderator/| jing officer of the meeting”. or “Mrs.
Khan ‘presided ows tile vheetirig.- The following list shows some
alternatives to some objectionable sexist words.

Sexist Nonsexist
businessman businessperson. business executive
CAE rari camera operator
congressman | representative. member of congress
firernany firefighter
fisherman fisher
mailman mail carrier, letter carrier
manmade humnan-made_of human mai ed
manpower workers, personnel, employees, human
yosource
policeman police officer
salesman salesperson. sales representative

Notice that even though MANmade is offensive, huMAN-made
is not. And even though MANpower is offensive, huMAN resource
ts not, Again, though a female employee is a woMAN, she’s not
part of MANpower; rather, she’s part of huMAN resource.

I's harder to follow than to remember, isn't it? Some people
say it is. A friend of mine made some slant remarks in this regard
“It seems sort of contradictory and tronical to me”. she sabd,
“because, Tue objection not only to being a "MAN— in words, but
also to being feminine in words like authoress. poetess, lady
doctor. lady lawyer, sculptress or the like. I'm also an author,
poet. lawyer, sculptor. or dector. like you. | don't like the —ess’
portion of such sexist words”. So, it would be better to refer both
to women and men in these professions by the same words, Fair
and unbiased words are ahvays better.

All e-books & Software : www.tanbircox.blogspot.com
Expressing CHAPTER
Ideas The 1 1
Right Way

Good writing is not just saying the right
thing. but saying things right

S.M.2.H
7)

A. Expressing The Point of View

B. Focusing on Something

C. Emphasizing

D. Downtoning

E, Linking Words and Phrases

F. Rhetorical Ways of Focusing or
Highlighting, Emphasizing, and
Creating Dramatic Effect

G. Other Ways of Focusing and
Emphasizing

r

IYAOYTDY 7 shane enn Wt ren be
www.) aceooor. com/tand
Oprussiig ieferts Thy Rig Way suo

‘As we all know, the main purpose of any piece of writing, whatever
lhe subject or theme or point of interest, is to express some
(thought in terms of words. In other words, one is. said to have
good writing skills if he is able to express in writing what he intends
lo express. A letter, for example, may be given a specific format or
physical layout. but that format can not exsure a good writing.
Good writing, in fact, involves writing good sentences and
paragraphs. Good writing is characterized by proper choice of
words, phrases, sentence patterns, and the proper logical approach
so that the language can represent the thought most effectively.

Good writing means not just saying the right thing, but saying
things right. That is, one has to think as much about how he
should say what he wants to say as about what he should say.
u fonably, h nobody can write well without a well-
defined subject. There must be a definite idea or thought to, put
down, which is a subject of a discussion of CHAPTER 2 of this
book. As far as this chapter is concerned, we assume that the
subject we want to write on is predefined and very clear to us, and
what we are concerned with is how we can best express our
thoughts in writing. Obviously, writing only grammatically correct
sentences is not enough in being able to express thoughts. Rather,
we'll give preference to writing “effective” sentences—sentences
that are readable, attractive. and strong. In a sense, this book deals
not only with the “grammar of language”, but also with the
“grammar of waiting”.

A. Expressing The Point of View

Often we can look at things from 2 number of points.6t view
(yfitsfe), Looking at things from any specific point of view is a
matter of logic and thought. And there is no douke that we can
moke our writings more readable by allowing Sur lanquage to
express such viewpoints. Let's take the following example.

He did it at last. He was wrong to have done it, But politics is a

different thing. And people suid he was nght because he was a

politician.

Effective Writing Sil For Advanced Leomers
Updated Bangla e-books(pdf): www.facebook.com/tanbir.ebooks
In the above paragraph, it's clear that what the man did ts looked at

from two points of view » moral and political Considered from the
toral point of view, what he did is wrong. On the other hand. from
a peice point of view, he was right. Now, if we rewrite the

graph clearly, exp Q these two viewpoints, the paragraph
vil Ge mare teadabte. natural, refined, anid smoot

He did it at last. Morally, he was wrong to have done it But
politically, he was night

The two adverbs “morally” and “politically” occur side by side for
‘which the diction may seem to be boring. So we can use the
adverbial phrases as follows -

He did it at last, From a moral point of view, be was wrong.
although looked at politically, he was night

Notice that now the two sentences have merged into one
sentence. And Is this last sentence not more readable?

As has been said before. it's a good practice in writing to say
from what point of view we look at things. In doing this we can use
adverbs formed by adding “ly” to adjectives. or we can use some
phrases of certain constructions shown in the following -

—ly form | gerund form —ed infinitive form
morally, morally looked at morally, | to speak from a
speaking, moral point of

view.
politically, | politically politically to speak from a
speaking, considered, political point of

view.
vi int advertials/adjuncts usually occur at the beginning of

the sentencé, and are separated from the rest of the sentence by a

All e-books & Software : www.tanbircox.blogspot.com
axprewinig Ideus The Rigiy Way 205
B. Focusing on Something

Sometimes we need to highlight something by directing readers’
attention to it. In doing this we use a number of words. These
focusing words are usually used before or after the word to be
focused. Observe. for example, the use of the highlighted words in
the following sentences.

1. fa) God can help you.
(b) God alone can help you.
2. {a) I need a shirt.
(b} | need only a shirt.
3. (a) He was punished because he disobeyed his teachers.
(b) He was punished simply because he disobeyed his
teachers.
(c) He was punished mainly because he disobeyed is
teachers.

Words ivy. tise Goss ust in the above sentences act of greet
value to us when we want to point to thi
dearly, or specially The iradent use of sich words’cin Walp’ ta
express our thoughts very effectively. Such words can be called
focusing adverbs/adjuncts, and can be classified into two groupes :

Limiters, and

Additives.

Limiters. in general. restrict what is said to the part focused
Limiters which restrict what is said only to the part focused is
called exclusives. while those which restrict: whet 's'said ‘malay or
particularly to the part locused are known as particularizers.
Exclusives include the following. Ss

simply, alone, only, purely, just. meaty,
exclusively.

And among the particularizers the common ones are :

chiefly, particularly, in particular, mainly,
especially, mostly.

<vD Effective Writing Sam For Advanced
Updated Bangla e-books(pdf): www.facebook.com/tanbir.ebooks
Now observe the differences in the meanings of t

types of limiters.

He only told me this.

[He did nothing else. All he did was to tell me this.

He told me only this.

[He told nothing else.|

Only he told me this.

[Nobody else told me anything about this; only HE told me.|

It's obvious from the above examples that the exclusive limiters are
position-sensitive; that ts. they change thelr focus with the change
in their positions,

Now let's look at the use of these particularizers.

He failed mainly because he hadn't studied hard.
[There were other reasons of his failing, his not studying being
the main.)

Contrast the sense of the above sentence with that of the
following one.

He failed only because be hadn't studied hard.

[There was no other cause of his failing.)

This party is for young couples. But preference will be given to
the ones having at best two chikren.

The above two sentences can be re-written as =

This party is for young couples, especially the ones having at
best two children.

Now try to understand the change in the meaning of the
sentence if the word ‘only’ were used in place of the word
‘especially’, In that case, the part “This party is for young couples”
would be redundant (unnecessary). Therefore. if we meant “only”,
we would have to rewrite the sentence as the following -

This party is only for couples having at best two children.

In light of the above discussion, it can be said that we should be
careful enough in using particularizers and exclusives in sentences.
In no way should we use a word of the one type when actually a
word of the other type is needed.

All e-books & Software : www.tanbircox.blogspot.com
Siprensingg Mets The Right Warr 205

Focusing Structures

So far we've seen how something is focused using focusing
words. There are. however, some structures also through which
we can focus a particular thing. These structures are also useful to
emphasize something. It's required that the reader leam the
structures as we'll as their uses.

Let's proceed by taking some examples. Look at the following

sentences ;

@ | am not tired.
@ 1! am bored,

You want to focus the word ‘bored’, of. in a sense, you want to
emphasize that you are bored, not tired. To do this you might
construct a sent like the following

fm not tired, fm bored.

and might express the focus by your tone. But this construction is
not effective enough. If you want to emphasize the word ‘bored’,
you can use some words like :

fm not tired, I'm just bored.
Im really bored.
But you can reconstruct the whole sentence like the following, and
bring about your desired effect -
= [m not tired: WHAT IAM ts BORED,
Now see the following examples :
I don't want a pen. co
| want a pencil. <
= I don't want a pen; what I want is a PENCIL.
Tom didn’t tell me this. :
Bob told me this.
= Tom didnt tell me-this; who told me (this) is BOB.
| didn’t give it to Munir.
| gave it to Tuhin,
= | didnt give it to Munir; whom | gave it (to) is TUHIN.

RS
Effective Sis For Advanced Leanes
Updated Bangla e- books(pdf): www. facebook.com/tanbir.ebooks
could be written asf

Tm BORED, not tired,

| want e PENCIL. not a pen,

TOM told me this. not Bob.

| gave it to TUHIN, not to Munir.
Obviously. that WH-structure is the most effective as far as
focusing is concerned.

Test Yourself and
Learn Better

Use focusing structures and rewrite the following sentences
1. I didnt say that. | said that # would not work.
2. l want to find out who the criminal is
3. | know what to do: now | want to know HOW to do it.
4. She doesn't love you: she loves Mohit.
5. | know what he did. but I don't know why he did that
6. Lam not embarassed; | am really impressed.
7. Do anything you like. but don't touch that button.
8. | did nothing else: | touched the button.
9. We don't need MBAs; we need MAs.

ANSWERS :

1. I didn’t say that: what | said was that it would not work
Or, | didn't say that, all (that) 1 said was that it would not
work.

Or, | didn’t say that: it would not work—that's what | said.

2. What | want to find out is who the criminal is.

Or, Who's the criminal?—that's what | want to find out,
Or, All | want to find out is who the criminal is.

3. | know what to do; what I now want to know is how to de it.
Or, | know what to do; but how to do it—that's what | want to
know,

4. She doesn't love you; whom she loves is Mohit
Or, Whom she loves is MOHIT, not you.

Or, She loves MOHIT, not you.
All e-books & Software : www.tanbircox.blogspot.com
layrteadeeg deers The Right Warr 209

5 | know what he did; what I don't know is why he did that.
Or, What | don't know is WHY he did that. not WHAT he did.
6. I'm not embarassed; what | AM is IMPRESSED.
Or, What | am is IMPRESSED, not embarassed.
Or, | am just IMPRESSED, not embarassed.
7. De anything you like; ONLY don’t touch that button.
Or, What you must not do is (to) TOUCH that button; do
anything else.
Or, Only what you must not do is (to) touch the button: do
anything else.
8 What | did was (to) TOUCH the button, and nothing else.
Or, | ONLY TOUCHED the button and did nothing else,
Or, ALL | did was TOUCH the button.
Or, ALL I did was that | TOUCHED the button; | did nothing
else
9. What we really need is MAs, not MBAs.
Or. We ONLY need MAs, and not MBAs.

There are. however, other structures which we can use to
focus a thing or an idea, These are shown below.

@ it is ony when | requested him humbly that he took the
money.

Or, He took the money only when | requested him humbly.

@ It is only when you ask him that he will help you.

Or. He will help you only when you ask him.

C. Emphasizing

Often we peed to emphasize or de-emphasize something. Jo do
this we use some words that have the ability to do so. Wectan also
use some structures—that is, we can rearrange the elgments of a
oe do the same, Read the following senteices

. fa) LT touched &.

(b) Lonly touched it.

2. (a) 1 touched that button.

(b) | touched only that button,

Or. | touched that button only.
EWS
10 Effective Writing Skis For Advanced Leamen
ee Bangla e-books(pdf): www.facebook.com/tanbir.ebooks
i a
(b) | badly need a haircut
[It has become urgent.]
4. (a) I resect your accusation (=feru™),
(b) Lutterly reject your accusation.
5. fa) | resent your criticism.

et

very much
strongly
6. {a) | remember the day.
definitely
(b) | teary } remember the day.
certainly

7. (a) It happened.
(b) It actually happened.

The sentences marked (b) are more emphatic than the ones marked
la). This is due to the use of some words called emphatic words. A
list of such words is given below ;

really certainly
honestly actually
surely for certain
highly of course
clearly for sure
indeed frankly
obviously literally
plainly simply
definitely just
fairly
These words are used mainly to emph the ing of the

word or phrase or clause following it; they tell nothing more about
that word or phrase or clause. Examples have been shown in the
paragraph. Some more exatnples, however, follow :
All e-books & Software : www.tanbircox.blogspot.com
Dypwendig ddeets The Right War 211
| can't understand it.
— |just/simply can? understand it.
| don't believe it.
really
— I4simply > don't believe it.
literally
He said so.

actually
~ He {realy said so.
indeed

Now Use What You've Learnt
Use emphasizers in the blanks.
1. He—said this. But | don't—believe him. It's—all a hoax. If,
however, he tells you that again.—deny him.
ANSWER : He really said this. But | don't simply believe him, It's
obviously all a hoax. If, however, he tells you that again,
simply/plainly deny him.
2. I—bought the book. But at the first reading | realized that it—

€ ined nothing im So | must say it will—be of no use to
you

ANSWER : | really bought the book. But at the first reading |
realized that it actually ined nothing import. So | must

wy it will certainly be of no use to you.

3. l—admire your initiative, You—deserve praise

ANSWER : | honestly admire your initiative. You do/surely/
certainly/actually deserve praise

Amplifiers are akin to emphasizers Thay we ol ap pes
maximizers and boosters. Maximizers, as is obvious.by the term
itsell, points to the maximum of something. while bGbsters express
the degree of intensity. Some maximizers are showin below

absolutey entirely thoroughly
altogether fully utterly
completely quite most

in_all respects

Effective Writing Skis For Actvanced Lsames

2
TE dated Bangla e-books(pdf): www.facebook.com/tanbir.ebooks
lollowing examples.

Read the fi

A

6.

vs

{a) That is true.
(b) That is absolutely true.
(c) That is certainly true.

. fa) He did it.

(b) He completely did it.

(c) He did it completely.

(a) The building has collapsed down.

(b) The building has entirely colapsed down.
(c) The building has collapsed down entirely.

. la) What he said is true.

(b) What he said ts fully true.

. (a) You are right.

{b) You are quite right.
(a) He explained it.

Boosters, as has already been said, tice Sembilan
adjective or activity. Some boosters are shown below

badly heartily violently
deeply much well
greatly $0 8 great deal
a deal a lot of far more

Now observe the uses of some of these boosters.

L.

fo) He was hurt.
(b) He was badly hurt.
(c) | badly need the information.

. (a) I can feel it.

(b) I can feel it deeply.
{a) She likes me.
(b) She likes me very much.

. fa} I wanted to see him.

{b) 1 so wanted to see him.
( =| wanted to see him very much.)
All e-books & Software : www.tanbircox.blogspot.com
Lagmensnny iets The Right Warr 213

5. (a) I can understand your problem,
(b) 1 can well und d your probl
6. {a) Teday Im happier.
(b) Today I'm much happier

Notice the diff b the foll Q maximizer and
booster,
He completely denied it.
He strongly denied it.

The former (completely), in this context, is very close in meaning
with the latter, but in no way equivalent to it. So you have to be
very careful in using maximizers and boosters if you want to
express your thought in the precise way. Read the following pairs
of sentences and try to discern the differences of meaning between
each pair.
1. {a} She has read the material completely.
{b) She has read a lot of the material.
2. (a) He &s the best boy of this class in all respects.
(b) He is by far the best boy in the class
3. (a) What he says ts fully true,
(b) There ts much truth in what he says

D. Downtoning

Sometimes we need to express our thoughts in such a manner

which lowers the effect of the verb, In other words, sometimes we

need to lower the force of the meaning of a verb. For this purpose

we use some words/phrases which are called downtoners, Fhese

downtoners, however, can again be sub-classitied as the allowing
<

Compromisers a
Diminishers &
Minimizers

Approximators

Compromizers have only a. slight lowering effect. Some
compromizers are shown below.
214 Effective Woting Sols For Acivanced Leamers
“pated Bangla e-books(pdf): www.facebook.com/tanbir.ebooks
sort < (in informal American English)

[kind of like i

(= like it. but not very much }

What did you tell him?

- | sort of gave him some advice.

(Maybe it can't be called good advice.)

Weiter P (especially in British English)

He's the best player, isn't he?

~ Yes, he quite played and amused the audience, but | think
there are others who play better.

{I don't think he’s the BEST player)

We quite enjoyed the party, but I've been in better ones.

(1 didn't enjoy it very much.)

It's rather a good idea, but try to create something more
interesting.

I rather like tea in the morning. but | enjoy it most in the
afternoon
Likewise, "more" and “less” are also compromizers,

Diminishers throw the meaning of a verb downward

ied bly Same pe are :

Partly, somewhat, in part
to some extent, slightly,

a little.
Your advice somewhat changed her belief
(= didn't change completely)
When she arrived the situati hat | d

Rabindranath has somewhat influenced her poetry.

I know her slightly.

Your parents behavior has influenced you to some extent.

The result of the experiment vatied to some extent when the
method was changed.

The flood partly affected the region

His condition has improved a little.

He talks a little more than you do.

All e-books & Software : www.tanbircox.blogspot.com
Kxpuenwang Adeas The Right Wary 215

Diminishers diminish the thrust of the activity represented by a
verb so much that it almost gives a negative meaning. Some
examples are :

abit barely hardly
little scarcely

in the least _ at all
in the slightest.

Now compare each sentence of each pair of sentences with the
other,
1. {a) He knows about it.
{b}) He knows little about it.
(= He knows almost nothing about it.)
2 {a) She turned pale.
{b) She turned pale a bit.
3. (a) Wait please.
(b) Wait a bit (= just for a mornent) please.
4. {a) She arrived again and had to leave again.
(b) She had barely arrived when she had to leave again.
5. (a) | have no money to last the weekend.
(b) | have barely enough money to last the weekend
[= only just]
6. (a) Further improvement is not noticeable
(b) Further improvement is barely [= almost not)

noticeable.
7. (a) I don't go there. com
(b) [hardly ever/seldom go there.
{= I don't go there frequently.) Ss

8. (a) She could not speak for tears. es
(b) She could hardly speak for tears.
9 (a) He doesn't know the people he works with.
(b) He hardly knows |= knows very little] the people he
works with.
10. (a) When he arrived at the station the train left.
16 Ettectve Wilfing Skits For Advonced Learner:
Updated Bangla e-books(pdf): www.facebook.com/tanbir.ebooks
(b) Hardly/Scarcely/Barely had he arrived at the

station when the train left.
(«As soon as he arrived at the station, the train left)
« No sooner had he arrived at the station than [not
‘when'] the train left.
11. (a} As soon as we reached home. It started raining
(b) No sooner had we reached home than tt started
raining.
(c) Hardly/Scarcely/Barely hod we reached home
when it started raining
12. (a) I'm not hungry.
(b) fm not in the least hungry
13. (a) I don't love her.
(b) I don't love her at all.
14. (a) | believe that it won't happen
(b) | doubt/suspect whether it will happen at all.

The approximators are the following
almost barely
all but —_as good as
The work is all but (« almost) finished,
This plan is as good as that plan
I nearly died.
She nearly (= all but/almost) killed me.
He comes here almost always.
He almost fainted. (But he actually didn't faint.)
| can scarcely agree to his proposal; in fact, | don’t agree to
his proposal

E. Linking Words and Phrases

This is one of the most important techniques that you should know
and apply if you want to write better. In this book. for this reason.
due emphasis will be given on this section And it's important that
you learn all the tactics and do all the exercises. Do not skip any
section.

All e-books & Software : www.tanbircox.blogspot.com
(\ereatig Idens The Right War 217

If what we say is important. then, to be sure, the way we say
it js also equally important. We use lanquage to express our
thoughts. opinions, observations. beliefs etc. One kind of thought
or kdea may be, and in most of the cases is, followed by another
lund of thought or idea, which may or may not be closely related to
the former. Hence when we express various kinds of thoughts in
veritences or phrases, we have to ensure that one kind of thought
flows smoothly and logically into another, This, consequently,
necessitates the use of some words/phrases which link one kind of
thought with another. These may be called linkers. We need to
wae linkers not only to write effectively, logically, smoothly. and
jucidly. but also to facilitate easy and comfortable reading. We need
wich linkers for various purposes. the most important of which are,
as learnt from experience, as follows :

S

For this linking purpose. various words and phrases’ are used
most of which are adverb phrases or prepositional piirases. These
are commonly known as conjuncts. You needto know almost
each and every of them if you want to be a good writer. These
conjuncts, as you've already known, are of different types. They're
named according to what function they serve in the sentence. So,
take a brief look at the following conjuncts and then carefully se
the examples that follow.
218 Effective Writing Skit For Advanced Leamer
Updated Bangla e-books(pdf): www.facebook.com/tanbir.ebooks
ENUMERATIVE

first. second, third . . . etc.; firstly, secondly, thirdly . . .; one, two,
three , . .< for one thing . . . (and) for another (thing); for a start
(informal); to begin with, to start with; in the first place, in the
second place; next, then; finally, last. lastly: to conclude; last but
not least; there js still another thing, | want to make one final
point; another thing: one final point

REINFORCING

(to give more of the same type of information) ;

also. moreover, above all, in addition, furthermore, what is more,
then (in spoken English), equally, likewise

EQUATIVE
equally, likewise, similarly. in the same way/manner

TRANSITIONAL
(to pass from one type of idea to another) -
by the way, incidentally, now, as lor/to fin British English as to),

let us now turn to . . ., regarding . . .. to turn to .
talking/speaking of . . ., that reminds me of . . .
SUMMATIVE

then, (all) in all, to sum up, in conclusion, | will sum up by saying . .
., | will conclude by saying that . . .

APPOSITION

{to give additional information about something or to define
something) :

namely (= viz), in other words, for example (= eg or e. g.), for
instance, that ts (= 4. e. or je), that is to say, or what ts the same
thing, another way of putting it is... an example would be. . .

RESULT
hence, consequently, as a result. so, theref thus, how (for
some reason or other), .. —God knows why—. . ., with the result
that .. ., the result is . . ., the consequence (of that) was . . .

All e-books & Software : www.tanbircox.blogspot.com

Hering tehoes The Right War 219

INFERENTIAL
else, otherwise. then. in other words, in that case, if so, If not.
(and) that implies, from it you can conclude that...

REFORMULATORY
better, rather, in other words. or, a better way of putting it
is, . it would be better to say. . .

REPLACIVE

(to replace a statement made earlier) ;

alternatively, rather, on the other hand, or again, or (on the
other hand), the alternative is. . .. it might be better if .

ANTITHETIC

(to show contrast) »

instead (it works as a replacive also), then, on the contrary, in
contrast, on the other hand, by comparison, one the one hand

CONCESSIVE

(These adjuncts signal the unusual or unexpected or something
surprising) :

anyway (informal). anyhow (informal), besides (blend of reinforcing
with concessive). else, however, nevertheless. still, though. yet, in
any case, at any rate, in spite of that, after all, all the same («
nevertheless), on the other hand, even

TEMPORAL TRANSITION

(These signal time relationships) :

tmwentime, meanwhile, in the meantime, earlier, former, prectoding,
previous, already, as yet, before, first, formerly. previously, so far,
yet, before that, until now, at present. at this point. efw, presently
tin. American English), simultaneously. then, aftesward, again («
alter that), immediately, later. next. since, after that

So far you've learnt conjuncts. We also use disjuncts {o link
one thought with another. Disjuncts express an evaluation of what
ts being said. Some examples are as follows
220 Effiectve Skills For Actvonced Leamorn
Updated Bangla e- cae eal www. facebook.com/tanbir.ebooks
frankly. fortunately, to my regret. to our
to my surprise, naturally, selteiial, personally, strictly speaking, ft
may say so. if | am allowed to repeat. ederim Spee
very frankly, briefly, candidly. lly. bh
understandably. of course, tc: bin ane; unfottohasaly: enka
admittedly. definitely, indeed. surely, undeniably. undoubtedly.
unquestionably, quite likely, maybe (informal), perhaps, possibly,
presumably. supposedly. clearly. evidently. obviously, plainly,
apparently, actually. really, ideally, only apparently, nominally.
theoretically. basically, essentially. fundamentally, funnily enough,
hopefully (in American English), luckily, not unnaturally, naturally,
rightly, wrongly, foolishly, possibly

Conjuncts and disjuncts normally don't have any relationship
with the of the sent in which they're used. From
the examples that follow, youll be able to understand how useful
these conjuncts and disjuncts are in making a sentence concise and
expressing attitude, tone, reality. opinion and so on. So, now do
the following exercises. Once you've successfully completed them,
Tm confident that youll be able to write at least ten times better
than you wrote before. So, do all the exercises.

: Practice and Learn Better

1. Use enumerative conjuncts where necessary.

There are basically three reasons why we are so backward
economically. We have not yet been able to industrialize our
country on a great scale. Our savings are less than how much
there should be. We do not have skilled manpower.

ANSWER :
There are basically three reasons why we are so backward economically.
First, we have not yet been able to indusirialize our country on a great
scale, Second, our savings are bess than how much there should he.
Third, we do not have skilled manpower.

All e-books & Software : www.tanbircox.blogspot.com
(pewsenng fefeas The Right War 221

EXPLANATION

The writer here is talking about three reasons. Three isa definite
number. Therefore, he should use the above-mentioned
enumeratives to make his writing structured and readable.

2 Although there is today no complete solution to the problem of
formal organization design, the concepts that have been discussed
i» this chapter point to some tentative conclusions There is no
one best way to organize. Different organization formats are
oppropriate for different organizations facing different conditions,
The environment in which an organization functions is an
important determinant of what constitutes effective organization
design. Dynamic environments appear to require different
organization formats than do stable environments. And different
parts of an organization may require different designs within
different subenvironments.

Activities facing similar subenvironments should be grouped close
together. Since technology also has an impect upon grouping, a
fourth point is that diff of i among
activities should result in the kinds of groupings that keep
coordination costs at a minimum.

Once groupings have been made. that is. departments have been
formed, they must be integrated with each other. The

ization’s h fides one means for such integration.
Shans icisaver OG aaa aD unnguunoe alt Wiisarene eb
adaptation to fast-changing environments. The use of integrators
and project teams may often be useful for such coordination.

se

ANSWER :
Although there is today mo complete solution 10 the prublgi of formal
organization design, the congepts that have been disc ‘in this chapter
point to some tentative conclusions. First, there is 80 ome best way to
organize, Different organization formats are appropriate for different
organizations facing different conditions.

Second, the environment in which an organization functions is an
Amportant determinant of what constitutes effective organization design.

ys,
E Whiting Sis For Advanced Leamern
Updated Bangla e-books(pdf): www.facebook.com/tanbir.ebooks
Dynamic environments appear to require different formats than
do stable environments. And differing parts of an organization may require
differem designs within different subenvironments.

Third, activities facing similar subenvironments should be grouped close
together, Since technology also has an impact upon grouping, a fourth
point ts that different types of interdependence among activities should result
in the kinds if groupings that keep coordination costs ala minimum,
Finally, once groupings have been made, that is, departments have been
formed, they must be integrated with exch other, The organization's
hierarchy provides one means for such integration, Often. however, other
means of integration are necessary for adaplation to fast-changing
environments. The use of integrators and project teams may often be useful
for such coordination.
—H. G. Hicks & CR. Gullett.
Organizations » Theory and Behivior

2. Use -
for example
and
but

where necessary,

A good executive stops an activity if it is not entirely essential or is
at the point of becoming obsolete. The Du Pont Company would
always be ready to abandon a project just before # began to decline
in spite of the money. prestige, and effort that had already been
spent on it: that was ene of the reasons for the success of the
company. If any new idea came out, Du Pont were usually in the
forefront in developing it

ANSWER :

A good executive stops an activity if it ts not entirely essential of is at the

point of becoming obsolete. For example, the Du Pont Company would
All e-books & Software : www.tanbircox.blogspot.com
(yoresvng Adeus The Right Way 223

always be ready to abandon a project just before it began to decline in spite

of the money, prestige. and effort that had already been spent on it; and that

ous une of the reasons for the success of this company. But, if any new
let came out. Du Pont were usually in the forefront in developing it.

—C_N, Parkinson & M. K. Rustomi,

Excetlence In Management

3 Use
and
also
because
however

where necessary. You may have to combine two or more
tentences Into one sentence.

\Jse “and” to add similar pieces of information.

\Jse “also” to present additional information of the same kind.
Live “because” to show cause and effect relationship

Use “however” to show a twist (279) in the thought or idea.

lkxlgets are the action plans of an organization for the future,
These plans are expressed in terms of money, They are made for
ihe current year They are often made for many years ahead.
(kudgeting forces people to plan ahead, anticipate problems, and
woid waste. A budget tells you how you are progressing against
your plans. It shows you how the expenditure actually incurred
pampares with the expenditure which was planned, Unless you
hawe a budget for every item of expense, expenditure is likely to go
out of hand, Budgets must be prepared and agreed to by:the people
ato have to keep to the budget. It should not be prepsired by smart
young fellows in faraway head offices. s

ANSWER :
(Vout answer may not be the same as the following onc. But the following
ime ta good piece of writing.)
Skits For Actvanced Leones
Updated Bangla e- books(pat www.facebook.com/tanbir.ebooks

Budgets are the action plans of an organisation for the future. These plans
aire expressed in terms of money and are made for the current year and olten
also for many years ahead, Budgeting forces people to plan abead, anticipate
Problems, and avoid waste. A budget also tells you how you are
Progressing against your pians because it shows you how the expenditure
actually meurred comp with the expend which was planned. Uniess
you have a budget for every item of expense, expenditure ts likely to go out
of hand. Budgets. however, must be prepared and agreed to by the people
who have to keep to the budget. and not by smart young fellows in far-
away head offices.

—C_N. Parkinson & M. K. Rustomji.
Ewcellence ln Management
4. Use :
but
however
where necessary.
Use =
but—to express that the reality is not like this;
however—to signal a twist of thought or idea.
Some men are bom leaders. These are relatively few. It is possible
to learn the habits and thoughts which will in time make capable
managers. Leadership is something which can be learnt and
considerably improved by studying and learning from the experience
of others and by following certain practices, Skill in leadership
normally something that does not come by itself. It can be learnt.

ANSWER :
Some men are born leaders—but these are relatively few. 1 is possible,
however, 10 learn the habits and thougtis which will in time make
capable managers. Leadership is something which can be learnt and
considerably improved upoe by siudying and learning from the experience of
others and by following certain practices. Skill in leadership is normally
something that does not come by itsell—tut it can be learnt.
—C_N. Parkinson & M. K. Ruston,
Excetlence in Management

All e-books & Software : www.tanbircox.blogspot.com
faprenaing ideas The Rigit Way 225

5, Rewrite the underlined porti of the following sentences to
make them shorter.

(o) It is obvious that nobody is listening to him.

(b) The demand for this product has increased. So it Is easy to
understand that the price is likely to go high.

(c) I I may be allowed to speak frankly, this dress doesn't suit

you,

\d) This is the general case that people come in this place during
the winter.

te) I'm asking you seriously : Do you intend to resign?

() 1 speak honestly that | didn't tell him anything about that
matter

(9) t canbe said briefly as follows : When we are angry we
really become foolish.

ih) 'm sure that he won't pass.

()) He ts a good manager. And it is more important that he is a
qood leader. ,

ANSWERS :

(a) Obviously, nobody is listening to him.

(b) The demand for this product has increased; so, understandably, the
price is likely to go high.

(c) Frankly, this dress doesn't suit you.

of, Frankly speaking, this dress doesn’t suit you.

of, To speak frankly, this dress doesn't suit you.

or, To be frank, this dress doesn't suit you.

(d) Generally, people come in this place during the winter. Ss

(c) Seriously, do you intend to resign? Ra
(1) Honestly, 1 dido't tell him anything about that matter,
(g) Briefly, when we are angry we really become foolish
or, Briefly put, when we are angry we really become foolish.

(h) Surely, he won't pass.

of, To be sure, he won't pass.

(1) He is a good manager, What is more important (= Even more
important/More importuntly), he is a good leader,

ews—15
226 Effective Writing Sails For Actvanced Leamer

6. Use short disjuncts instead of the underlined portions of the
following sentences.

(a) We were about to start our journey. But it was unfortunate
that it began to rain.

(b) It was right for him to reject his offer.

{c) | was surprised (to know) that she began to shout without
any reason.

{d) We regretted (the fact) that he violated the rules.

{e) Look for a competent boy, and I am certain that you will find
one.

{f) It is clear that this is a case of malnutrition

{g) It Is apparent that they are tired.

{h) It is evident that what he says is true

(i) We were fortunate that we found him there

(i) It is natural that a mother loves her chikdren

(k) We are hopeful that they will be back within time

(i) It is very surprising that he is not happy with all his wealth.

ANSWERS :

(a) We were about to start our journey, but unfortunately, it began to
rain.

(b) Rightly, he rejected his offer.

(c) To my surprise, she began to shout without any reason.
(4) To our regret, he violated the rules.

(c) Look for a competent boy, and certainly, you will find one.
(f) Clearly, this is a case of malnutrition.

(g) Apparently, they are tired.

(h) Evidently, what he says is true.

(i) Fortunately, we found him there.

(j) Naturally, a mother loves her children.

(k) Hopefully, they will be back within time.

(1) Surprisingly, he is not happy with all his wealth.

= N.B. The most frequently used linkers are listed below -
lypeesiag Ades The Right Way

for example
namely
therefore

in other words
thus

for this reason
so

on the one hand
on the other (hand)
what's more
at any rate
even

at last

in the first place
next
furthermore

in fact

yet

though

by comparison
eventually
roughly” speaking
in my opinion
in short
presumably
to be honest

= quite properly

F. Rhetorical Ways of Focusing or Highlighting,
Emphasizing, and Creating Dramatic Effects
There are some rhetorical (S11) devices (3°12) by which we
can focus or highlight an idea very effectively, and sometimes
dramatically. These devices, in effect. act as emphasizers too. They
are very often used for their dramatic effect. Here are the figures

6 Antithesis

PS hs cis woud Ge’ lnk te dd mgpnln wc wes be

idea opposite to it in a balanced form in order to make the contrast
emphatic, effective, and dramatic. This figure is used both in
Wterature and in norrliterary articles or essays.

Lat's first take some examples in Bangla.

ere oera oft TEE Sere | (Sere! ER cory whe aot EE
ECS 1) set ES ara yfe sre) ER ates avtafewers,
faprewing Ideas The Right War 229

wreferrerre, wey sraSreerra eS acre af Sees cone are
wend fq sare aR

The above passage is not effective. Though there is no grammatical
mistake in it, it's dull, loose, and boring. [t's an immature writing.
But look at the next version of this passage.

wR exces oft 7Hq TETS aH, Stare | Sres EAR Sree Borers co
watts, zac fs sere) En, Set eee —adtalseers, amfewera,
saireeirs | [ean Sree oF en fires weer arate erty

In this version of the paragraph we've used antithesis. Notice the
use of “ETS FU" and “SreTS” side by side. This device puts the word
‘wist@” under more emphasis and focus. Likewise, the expression
“Sree cor 28S, eax 6B Sze" also contains antithesis. Also, look
wt the last sentence in which a contrast between “S11” and "St"
ere gy” is drawn to highlight the latter (ie, 1 Net) more
effectively. .

Here are more examples. In each case, observe the difference
between the statement(s) marked (a) and the one{s) marked (b).
Also try to understand why the statements marked (b) are more
effective.

1. (a) Heard melodies are sweet.
(b) “Heard melodies are sweet, but those unheard are
sweater.

&
F s.
2. (a) You should look at the bad sides of your'Son's conduct.
(b) You should look not only at the good sides but also at
the bad sides of your son’s conduct.

3. (a) If we are divided, we fall.
(b) “United we stand, divided we fall ~
Effective ‘Sais For Advanced
Updated Banga g oes big lish in www. facebook.com/tanbir.ebooks
4. [a) Try to a small pond,
(b) oe eeteees Cee bie he ae lees tes
small fish in a big pond.

5. {a) You are my enemy.
(b) You are my enemy, not friend.

6. (a) It's better.
(b) It's not just (6%) good, it's better.

7. (a) | don't want to be the deader of bad people.
(b) Better be a follower of a good leader than be the
leader of bad people.

But one thing you must remember - use this device only where
it's necessary and where it makes sense. That means, before using
this device, make sure whether it's needed at all or not. In most of
the cases where both sides of an idea are relevant but only one is
to be focused should you use this figure. The following example will
clarify the point.

Rewrite the following passage and make the expressions more
emphatic and effective.

Some people believe that those who are not honest suffer much in
the long run. It is not always true

The opposite is trac : The honest suffer in most of the cases.
The dishonest become happy. We live in a peculiar society where
the dishonest live the happiest life.

Now read the revised version of the passage. Here it is.

Though some people belive that those who are not honest suffer

much in the long run, it is not always true, On the contrary,

the opposite is true - that is, it is the honest who suffer in

most of the cases. not the dishonest. The dishonest. to our

great surprise, are very happy indeed. We live in a peculiar

society. Here the dishonest live the happiest life, mot the honest.
All e-books & Software : www.tanbircox.blogspot.com
Cxpreming Ideas The Right Way 231

§ Oxymoron

it’s a figure of speech in which two opposite or contradictory
words or terms or ideas are combined or juxtaposed (placed side by
side) so as to highlight the statement or expression and enhance
the effect. In this figure, by definition. a word is used before
another word, both of which seem to be contradictory, but some
attentive thinking reveals that they together give a special
meaning. Some examples are shown below.

death
living death

le
true lies

law
lawless law

kindness
cruel kindness

irregular
regularly irregular

ye ore

eaies orem
aan rere x
bs Ralial
wala we &

ete Ser
Eflectwe ‘Sam For Acivanced Leones
Updated Bangla e-books(pdf): www.facebook.com/tanbir.ebooks
2. (a) She is sad. But she looks nicer in that mood.
= (b) She ts sweetly sad.

3. (a) You have spoilt the child with too much kindness. That
kindness is equivalent to cruelty.
= (b) You have spoilt the child with your crue! kindness.

4, (a) He was cruel to me for my own good. His cruelty was
nothing but kindness.
= (b) He did me favor with his kind cruelty,

5. (a) He is hostile. But he never forgets to be courteous.
= (b) He is courteously hostile,

6. (a) It's officially being kept secret. But everybody knows it.
= (b) ifs an open secret.

Similarly, pl d madi dfully deaf, a long short-story,
visible darkness etc. are examples of oxymoron.

Test Yourself and
Learn Better

1. Mr. X said to his business partner, "Mr. Y, though ours is a
losing concern, we're eventually gaining from it, We're receiving
the government's subsidy, Also, we're enjoying a tax holiday.” How
could Mr, X say these words more dramatically and effectively by
using oxymoron?

2. “I know you're not actually idle, though people say you are. In
fact, Creative people are found to be idle this way. | must say you
are active indeed."—A father said these words to his artist son.
Say how he could say these words more effectively and concisely
by using

oxymoron,
All e-books & Software : www.tanbircox.blogspot.com
Pipes Idexts The Right Wary 233

4 Your younger brother is very idle; he does nothing but only
builds castles in the air (S=rFEqe SET Bez). One day you asked him
why he didn't do any work. He answered, “Dream doesn't come in
my sleep. That's why | dream while ['m not asleep.” You tell him
some words in one sentence in which you use oxymoron,

4. You ase sitting in a room beside a young lady whom vou dont
lnvow, Nobody is saying anything—neither you nor she. But ber
presence, her beauty, her furtive glances (on7™ 4f%)—all these
things are talking much to you. You're overwhelmed (382) by the
feeling, You're thinking of writing her a letter of only one sentence
in which you would tell her that though she was silent, her
presence talked to you much. Write a sentence using oxymoron so
that the lady falls in love with you after reading it.

§, You're a newspaper reporter. At present you're writing @ report
on the wretched (Z==1'T) lifestyle of the slum (#7) people of the
Dhala city. To you, the life those people are living is not a life st all;
i's more like death than life. Create a term of two words by using
the principle of oxymoron to describe those people,

ANSWERS :
b. aliving death (Sze)
4 | was overwhelmed by your talking silence
Or, Llove that speechful silence that covered the whole room and
wropped up you and me together.
4. Dreamless sleep is good for you, but sleepless dream ts net,
2. | know the value of your active and creative idleness. &
1, Ours is a profitable losing-concern. SS
~
S

¢ Epigram

Prof. Bain defines it as “an apparent contradiction in lanquage
which by causing a temporary shock arouses our attention to
some important meaning underneath ({=1ft*)." While in
oxymoron two words or ideas are placed side by side, in this figure
Effective Si@ls For Advanced Lehmen
Updated Bangla e-books(pdf): www.facebook.com/tanbir.ebooks
two apparently contradictory ideas are presented in two
expressions, But some amount of thinking reveals that there's a
sharp, indirect meaning hidden inside the expressions, Though this
figure is mainly used in literature, i's also found in other kinds of
, Writing. The following are some examples of epigram.
Speech was given to man to conceal (Om #1) his thoughts.
— Voltaire
Cowards die many times before their death.
— Shakespeare : Julius Caesar
This is the true beginning of our end.
— Sha LA Mid: Night's Dream

{ must be crue! only to be kind.
— Shakespeare - Hamlet
Make haste slowly, (274 ¢ Ma ra)

Happiness has become the greatest cause of his unhappiness.
Most of the time the richest are the poorest.

As you've already got the hint, this figure of speech gives
indirect meanings. At the first thought you get a twist (CS15§) in
the mind, and at the second thought you come to know the real
meaning. It arouses thought because it requires some thought
This figure, apart from being used in literary writing, can be very
meaningfully used in the opening or closing sentences of articles,
paragraphs, and the like. Quotations containing this figure can be
used toward much effectiveness at the begining, end, or middle of
any piece of writing. A drill with the following exercises will enable
you to grasp (S18 S41) its use more clearly.

Test Yourself and
Learn Better

1. A good artist should do the work of art in such a way which will

show the piece of work as natural. The less the work is artificial.

the more artistic it is. Such a work should witness the fact that the

artist has not made deliberate and experienced effort to create it;
All e-books & Software : www.tanbircox.blogspot.com

Kapressing Ideas The Right Way 235

rather it has flown from his/her imagination spinierocpal
octually

Complete the above blank with a sentence which contains an
epigram.

2. Newton sald that he know very little. But as compared with the
average men like us, he knew thousand times as much as we do. All
the scholars of the world said they little knew about the universe.
On the contrary, to our surprise, those who know little believe
they know much. Actually, "
Complete the sentence using the figure epigram.

4 . | got proof of this statement when | was face-
to-face with her. She didn't say a word. Not a single word. And nor
did 1. But the atmosphere seemed to be full of eloquence (34231,
#4281), | seemed to be listening to a shower of words. The silence
was meaningful—tull of communication.

Fill in the begining gap with an epigram,

4. When we're tired of sleeping, we take leisure (f@73) in getting up.
When, on the other hand, we're tired of working, we seek pleasure
ina kind of leisure in rest. But rest can give us no plasure unless we
ee ee See a tear gree he ee Pee ee ee rege
leisure. In other words,

Fil in the gap with a sentence containing an epigram,

ANSWERS : Se
4. The busiest man has the amplest (*¥84) leisure.
3. Silence is etimes more clog than words.

2. thins bei ale becsoedps eso Baap eae WA
1. Art consists in concealing (Cm #41) art.

Remember : the epigram has a deeper meaning which is clear
only at the second thought. Also remember that oxymoron is an
extreme form of epigram.
Eftectve Sk For Advanced Leamen
* Cli Bangla e-books(pdf): www.facebook.com/tanbir.ebooks
Climax

It's a very well-known and effective figure. In this figure, ideas
(or thoughts) or terms for words or phrases} are placed in an
ascending order according to their importance. As a result, the
most important thought or term occurs at the last place, the
second most important one occurs before it, the third most
important one before the second, and so on. This fiqure is normally
used where there are more than one result or cause or incident
coming one after another in a hierarchical manner. Since, in this
figure, the most important term or idea occurs at the last position,
our thought and emotion flows through the end of the sentence
gaining intensity (#7%*9) little by littl. Just consider the following
example,

ef wh come sftares se Oe SCE nS, TEM Coe stare w
Gt & te, ofs we come wenn ORT ECE Bie, SH A Eo; BR
WH CETNTS CATH RLM] CFET ETS Ble, StECH Cretnizs Gra ne; wie Efe
WH fares SeeI OM) SOUR ECS DIO, ETE LINE TE STGE EO)

The above isa good example of climax. Now well see some more
examples. (Climax ts used in sentences marked (b) in 1, 2, and 3.)

1. (a) | came saw and conquered.
(b) I came, | saw, | conquered.

2. (a) Use your brain, power, and heart to become rich,
influential, and a perfect man, respectively.
{b) To be rich, use your brain; to be influential, use your
power; but to be perfectly human, use your heart.

3. (a) Give me a kiss. Ill kiss you.

[instead of expressing this idea in this way. you can express it
in the following way toward more effectiveness :|
All e-books & Software : www.tanbircox.blogspot.com
Lupressingy Ideas The Right Way 237
{b) Hf you give me a blow, Ml not give you any blow in
return; I'll forgive you. If you snatch away my wealth,
TH not sue (fePte Tee SI) you; MM forgive you. If you
cause my health to break down, [ll not harm yours. but
if you. on any occasion, willingly or unwillingly, hiss

me, IH not forgive you. I'll kiss you back. Sure!

4. As Caesar loved me. | weep for him; as he was fortunate, |
rejoice at it; as he was valiant, | honour him, but as he was
ambitious, | slew (87% #21) him.

Shakespeare » Julius Caesar

5. | advice you to live, let others live, and help others live.

6. | have come here to help you earn money, then more
money, then even more money, and then to snatch it
away from you.

7. He taught me how to grow rich; And | became rich. Then
he taught me how to spend money less and grow richer;
and | grew richer. Then he taught me how to influence
people, and | became a leader. Then he taught me how to
worship wealth and power, and | died. &

&

S
You must already have observed that this figure is often
characterized by repetition. Actually, such repetition enables it to be
more effective, emphatic, and impressive. Though in many cases we
avoid repetitions to make the writing pithy (#8) and effective, in
this figure we often tend to prefer repetition to conciseness. This

figure suits well in persuasive and argumentative writing,
Effective Whiting Sith For Advanced Learmer
Updated Bangla e-books(pdf): www.facebook.com/tanbir.ebooks
Anti-C x or
This figure is the opposite of climax. In it the least important
idea or term is placed Jast. thus arranging the ideas or terms in the
descending order of thier importance. In most of the cases, this
figure is used to make someone or something ludicrous (aT). It
creates a slighting (e174), humorous (#eeIy4) effect, and best
suits in satirical (479T¥+) and comical writing Some examples are
shown below.

1. What things do you admire?
~ | admire my parents, my teachers, my King, most
scholars of the world, and cigarette.

2. Who does she live with?
~ She lives with her parents, brothers, sisters. and pillows
(artes),

3. Why do you weep? What haven't | given you? I've given
you all—a home, children, much wealth, fame, and, after all,
a black cat.

4. Where have you been these years?
~ Well, Ive been to London, to New York, to Khulna, to
my home village, and at last to jail.

5, She lost her husband, her child, her parents, and an
umbrella.

Use this figure only when you want to create an
atmosphere of humor or to slight away (2%) 2) someone.
Most of all, before using it, make sure whether you really need it or
not for the purpose at hand.

Test Yourself and
Learn Better
A coleague of yours {an officer with high responsibility) is going to
take an unwise decision. You want to warn him against his doing

so. You believe that if he takes such a decision, the company will
All e-books & Software : www.tanbircox.blogspot.com
Dkprening Meas The Right Wary 239

lowe reputation, then customers. then money, and at last will
dissolve. You want to say these things to him in a chiding
(feesieest) and mocking tone. How would you say it?

ANSWER :
The thoughts could be worded like this - tar er ae ee
decision, then you'll lose the company’s cust s,

money, your job. add ie tale Ol Gor baad: OK?

$ Chiasmus

This figure has its ground on a special way of construction. It
consists in the Inversion (fae S08 cm) of the second of two
parallel phrases or clauses or of the same phrase or clause for
emphasis or emotional effect, when it's subsequently repented
or referred to in a sentence. This figure is most often used in
poetry. But it can equally effectively be used in persuasive
writing, emotionally rich descriptive writing, or anywhere |/
i's actually needed there. See the following examples

1. The king come down, and down came the queen too.

2, We want trial, and justice do we want.
(sree Sere 51%, on apr fare 5S arses |)

3. We sent for him several times but he didn't come home.
Then we ourselves went to bring him. yet never ‘come
home he. S

4. Allah is everywhere—far and near, near ang far. So, you
don't have to go to the jungle in search ofshim.

5. We eat to live and do not live to eat.

6. Beauty is truth, truth beauty .. .
240 Effective Selis For Advanced Learner
Updated Bangla e-books(pat): www. facebook. com/tanbir.ebooks
7. For love is heaven. and heaven is love.
— Scott.
8. Live to learn, and learn to live.

Sometimes the rules of this figure can be violated, and yet
effective and impressive expressions can be constructed. As -

9. Drink wine, but take care that wine doesn't drink you.

10. He's not playing, but Is being played by.
(Ci Creme a, Sree few Ce ECE)

11. Not that he has married her, but she has married him.

§ Polysyndeton

This figure is characterized by the use of many
lf this is done, then each term or idea connected by the
conjunction receives the same emphasis, it being of equal
importance to any other of its kind. Consider, for example, the
following sentence -

oes wien eater gers ere Pred
WOM Tea WON, Zion, fea, Ses, fas:

Here no term—neither #1 nor ¢%" nor 4 nor Sre4 nor fes—
receives any importance at all. They don't impress the imagination,
They don't glaze before our eyes. But read the next version of it.

“rere orem ates geen ore rs —
FI WS Bre ear Zibe car fer wae Seq, wy fad
— “irate Saeeet

Now all the terms have received the same level of emphasis, and
since they together demand a long breath to be pronounced at a
stretch, they create a sustaining flow of emotion. This in turn

the emphasis,
All e-books & Software : www.tanbircox.blogspot.com
Lyprewing Ades The Right Warr 241
See the following examples.

1. (a) They all died in the accident—the man, the woman, the
child. and the dog
(b) They all died in the accident—the man and the woman
and the child and the dog. | weep for them all
2. (a) Whom do you love most?
~ | love my father, mother, wife, and son, | love them all

equally
(b) 1 love my father, and my mother, and my wile. and my
son, | love them all equally.

§ Hyperbaton

In this figure the grammatical order of words are inverted (ie,
changed in the opposite direction) for the sake of emphasis. The
folowing examples will clarify the process. In each of the following
examples, try to discern (34*75 *#}) the difference between the
sentence marked (a) and the one marked (b). In the sentences
marked (b), the figure hyperbaton is used

1. (a) 7 iapalgainalaaye sail

(normal order)
(b) Thrice was he elected inthe prlamentay election
(emphatic). x

2. (a) Phave never seen such a beautiful girl
(b} Never have I seen such a beautiful girl.
3. (a) | have neither men nor money.
(b) Neither men nor money do | have.
or, Men and money have I none.
iWS—16
42 Effective Writing Skits For Advanced Leaner
Updated Bangla e-books(pdf): www.facebook.com/tanbir.ebooks
4. (a) He not only stole the money but also broke the safe.
{b) Not only did he steal the money. but broke the safe

too.

5. (a) | know that. (== = we)
(b) That | know. (31 st en 1)

6. (a) Those who don't prey will perish.
(b) Perish they will who don't pray.

% Anaphora or Epanaphora

This figure has the same effect as polysyndeton has. Both
these figures are used for emphasis, reinforcement, and long-
lasting persuasive effect. In anaphora, the first word or phrase
or clause of a sentence is fepeated in one or more successive
sentences. Though this figure is mainly used in poetry. it can very
effectively be used in prose too. Let's take some examples,

1. (a) | came, saw, and conquered.
(b) I came, I saw, | conquered.

{In this sentence both anaphora and climax have been
used.|

2. (a) What things did you do there?
~1| played, swam, fished, and had a picnic.

(b) -1 played, I swam. I fished, and J had a picnic.

3. Is not old wine wholesome, old pippins toothsomest, old
wood burn brightest, old liner wash whitest? Old soldiers,
sweet-heart, are surest, and old lovers are soundest?

— Webster : Westward Hoe

4. If I have it done by others, you say it’s not well-done. If |
do it myself, you say it’s not | who have done it. If | don't
do it, [fl have to compensate. Tell me what to do.

All e-books & Software : www.tanbircox.blogspot.com
Uspreniag hides The Right Tay 243

5. What he says is not true; What he does is not

constructive: What he believes is wrong and biased. Don't
mix with him. Even, don't talk with him at all

When pou are away, | miss you; when you are near, | don't
understand you. You are my sorrow. You are my dream.

Curse be on those who dont love men; curse be on those
who lave men only to deceive them: and curse be on those
who love men like fareweather friends. Only those who love
selflessly are to be honored.

. | tove everything that's old—old friends. old times, old

manners, old books, old wine.
— Goldsmith ; She Stoops to Conquer

$ Epistrophe

This figure is just the opposite of anaphora. While in anaphora
words or phrases are repeated at the beginning of several
wntences, in epistrophe the same kind of repetition occurs at the
end of several sentences. This gives vigor and energy to the
language. As a result, it produces some effects of emphasis,
reinforcement, and long-lasting persuasive effect.

as

Whatever they do will be of no use : their plan will fail:
their activity wil! fail, their money will fail; their power
will fail. In 2 word, everything will fail, So, don’t worry!
Your company will be the market leader. =

~~
“Wit is dangerous, eloquence is dangerous® 4 talent for
observation is dangerous, everything is dangerous that
has efficacy and vigour for its characteristics.”

eet ere fg aca ay) ce aca Serta Arete Ste Cy Eee ae

Wet Eom, Sine fee erece ar | SIG ee, corre ware, nfs sara, HtE-
oe sare—aniers 2g erica) Gye fS area Arana Bre wnt aly
& ‘Sills For Actvanced Leceners
Updated Bangla e-books(pdf): www.facebook.com/tanbir.ebooks
4. You are the root of all evils. Come on! Who told the lies

about it? You, And who created the chaos? You, And who
caused those people to die? Wasn't it you? And—tell me—
who at last arranged for the trial? It's you! You rogue! Shut
up!

This figure is very often used in speeches and dr apart
from (3 31¢) its being used in poetry.

Test Yourself and
Learn Better
Read the following pieces of writing and say to what extent they're
effective and why.

1, Maybe you are irritated. And so you want to say something
offensive so that you can have a satisfaction at least of
disburdening your mind of its grudge (=P), But listen. “No one
has ever yet harmed his stomach by swallowing evil words.” Just
forget about it all. Yes, forget it! The man whe dishonored you
will also be dishonored by one who is like him or inferior to him,
You are not an inferior person like him. are you? You are not
ent to Tits. Rather, It's you who are superior. There is much

in pain ber this. Just keep silent. Silence talks
eiaich. Avenge (“*8t=7= ul) yourself by not quarreling just
now. Your forgiveness will be his real punishment. Remember
these wise words of Leo Tolstoy, “Repay evil with good and you
deprive the evildoer of all the pleasure of his wickedness.

NOTE : Read the above letter over and over again and try to
identify why it's persuasive and strong. Especially, notice the bold-
faced sentences. It's by dint of them that the letter has become so
effective. Don't you think so? And can you say which figure of
speech has been used in which of these bold-faced sentences? Look
here ;

The first two sentences are emphatic and reinforcing because
there's a repetition in them.

All e-books & Software : www.tanbircox.blogspot.com

Faprewing kedeas The Right Way 245
ln the second set of a few sentences the fiqure anaphora occurs
W's you who are. . ~ is an emphatic construction. Because it's
placed after anaphora, its effect has been doubled, so to say

The rest of the bold-faced sentences contain the figure epigram.

2 | dont need such valueless wealth. What good is it to me if |
can't do any good to my relatives with 1? What good Is it to me
if 'm to rob others of their happiness to ear it? | don't want to
have o rich hand keeping my heart poor. You say i's power.
Power? How—l question you? It will keep my mind narrow, It will
require me to suck others’ blood to keep it. It will keep me aloof
from mankind and weaken me internally. Now, is it power? But |
don't need your answer, because you're an educated fool.

NOTE : Carefully observe the overall ion and develop
of the above passage. It's very strong, isn't it? But why is it so?
Think.

Some figures (=**412) have made the passage more effective.
Observe their use.

The phrases Sie “educated fool” are examples of
y petition of “what good is jt to me if in two
consecutive Blade scagh Sox the figure anaphora. The
phrases “have a rich hand” and “keeping my heart poor” together
produce a contrasting effect. and so are an example of antithesis,
The repetition of the word “power” in both affirmative and question
forms has had a reinforcing effect. Next to it occurs another
anaphopa (the repetition of “It will). Ss

a
So, io iioia underibield mew ‘iolip ie oeseant isso wong? AGING!
fiche Whe se 0h a uations aise kes carts Ves Os and Gf any
answer to it. It has added a dramatic effect to the passage. A good
ending indeed.

S. A weak valiant I call him. And why not? He went to fight his
enemy. And he did fight And win he did. But he was defeated

246 Eftective ‘Skills For Advanced
Updated Bangla e-books(pdf): www.facebook.com/tanbir.ebooks
he won. i sure be surprised—fell in love with his

enemy's daughter. And the daughter's father won over him by
being defeated at the outset (=e).

They both surrendered : one to his enemy. the other to his love.
So, why do you scold ("1 1) me when | declare that all winners
are losers?

NOTE :
Weak valiant—oxymoron
A weak valiant | call him—hyperbaton
[normal order + | call him a weak valiant.)
And... And—anaphora

.. win he did—hyperbaton
[normal order . he won|

. . did fight—emphatic construction.
But he was . . because he won.—epigram,

_ won over him by being defeated —eplaram
They both d
_ all winers are ieee —eninam (paradox)

4. You are the root of all evils. You don’t want to admit (#r= 71)
it? But tell me who spread ($9041) the rumor (@#%) among the
workers? You. And who divided them into two groups and enraged
(cefsca oat) the one against the other and helped to create the
chaos and the bloodshed? You. And who—tell me honesthy—was it
that again staged a fake trial and blamed both the parties? Wasn't it
you?
NOTE : All through the passage the figures anaphora.
epistrophe, polysyndeton, and rhetorical question have been
used.

Irhetorical question—a question whose answer the speaker
already knows}

G. Other Ways of Focusing and Emphasizing
There are still other ways to focus and emphasize ideas. These
must be learned and used where necessary. Ideas can be focused
and emphasized by —

All e-books & Software : www.tanbircox.blogspot.com

Toren Adeets Fe Kegon Warr 247

@ repeating words, phrases, clauses, or sentences;

@ making the sentence under consideration longer than the
ones around it; and

@ putting the idea to be emphasized im a single paragraph.

Now let's see some examples.

Unemphatic = ea 728 conre seree ey SR,

fimphatic > Wy fey whe, come wee oy eR)
Or. of oy fey sia, sf8 come sere wey)
Unemphatic : Of Gear Sir ures |

Emphatic : Fee Tease TS)

Unemphatic -: | do everything for your good.
Emphatic : Whatever | do, (I) do for your good.
Unemphatic - He goes everywhere to earn money,

Emphatic : Wherever he goes, he goes to earn money.
Unemphatic - He's a man of courage

Emphatic : He's a man—a man of courage.
Unemphatic : She's a good doctor

Emphatic : She's a doctor—a good doctor.
Unemphatic -: | want a glass of cold water

Emphatic : | want a glass of water—cold water

A man may be very rich. He may be very powerful. He may
fue a good look. Or he may have a vest knowledge. But If he
doesn't love his country and is not loved by others equally
ond doesn't try to do any good to his nation either by his
wealth or power or knowledge, ee ae a Seen at a FIRS Se
a beast! Ss

a“
In the above paragraph. the longest sentence attracts your
attention the most. Doesn't it? Read the paragraph carefully, The
boklfaced sentence is the longest. It requires you to give the
longest breath. It's length. amidst the other short sentences,
demands the greatest emphasis. If you like to emphasize the
content of a sentence, you may, similarly, make it derably and
noticeably longer than any other sentence around it. This

Eflective Wilting Sais For Advanced teamen
Updated Bangla e-books(pdf): www.facebook.com/tanbir.ebooks
technique ts often used in modern poetry, not only in prose and
especially in dramatic dialogs, Even short sentences among longer
ones receive special attention and emphasis.

om fees wire ep comm farm, area acs erfern | core ere fereore
Geren He) aaeet tq | Seat errs HINT AreTcy oretre 2s Core GT
Sty ob ae ae ree See STS Se ee GIS) Hern oe) aaa
Fe cers ore Mre ATE SITS OE | GR FE eB Ste SITS | Ee Sta)
Gem ota cers Gye eh ate ee am) are Sere ee
eifern cree feye a) cree Brees | am)

aoe cet seneie —ay set — are aces Soe aa |

weary Sees Fed wes ake TE eM aH owe | CHS wre fice
wrth) 26 are fee oH ) eed oe orn cm Bierce Saye =e,

Look at the single-sentence paragraph in the middle position, Why
has this sentence been placed as a separate paragraph? Because
the author wants to highlight this imagery (eas); that is. he
wants to emphasize thal incident the most. The passege has, to be
truthful, become beautiful and impressive mainly because of this one-
sentence paragraph. When one or two sentences are arranged as a
single paragraph amidst other paragraphs each of which contain
many sentences, they draw our attention the most. So. you can, if
tecessary, emphasize or focus a sentence by this way.

All e-books & Software : www.tanbircox.blogspot.com
TONE AND CHAPTER
STYLE 12

Take care of the sense and the sounds will
take care of themselves
— Lewis Carroll

sf
Gs
lad Ue
AIAINAIY TALL DDN RDS STAI Peer FZ NN ice
CULL. / ACE 000K. com/tanot: .GHOOKS
2)

1, TONE / ATTITUDE
A. What's Tone
B. The Three Strings of Tone
1, Tone toward Subject
2. Tone toward Reader
3. Tone toward Self
C, What tone to Choose
1. Tone and Purpose
2. Tone and Style
D. How Tone Is Manifested

fl. STYLE
A. What's Style
B, Levels of Style
1. Formal Style
2. Colloquial Style

r

www. jac

Ht
60

SS
GS
et
GS
GS
S$
Ss
QS
S
S
fome Ann Ste 251
I. TONE/ATTITUDE

A. What's Tone?

‘Tone is a web of feeling stretched throughout an essay.” It's the
mental disposition of the writer (or of a character in the piece of
writing) toward the subject he or she is dealing with, the reader,
and self. In other words, tone is the emotional state of the writer
how he or she treats the subject, reader, and himself or herself,

When writers write something, they use not only their
reasoning power, but also their emotion. They consciously or
unconsciously respond to the subject matter, reader, or themselves
in different ways at different times. For example, writers may
evaluate a subject objectively, or they may express their own
opinion about it or express or imply their attitude toward it, The
result is a specific tone—simple or complex. A writer's tone may
very on different occasions. It may be numerous also, Even in our
ovary conversation with people we express various tones.
for le. we're angry. sometimes friendly.
sometimes detached (S27), sometimes indifferent, sometimes
ironical or satirical, i thoritative (*¥44{%),
sometimes dogmatic and assertive, sometimes entertaining.
ometimes callous, and 40 on, All of these are aingle-word forms
ol identifying tone. In fact, tone may be of as many types as the
number of aspects of human emotion.

aan

B. The Three Strings of Tone wt

There are three strings or strands of tone. They may beled the
determinants of tone. They are - Ss

ser
@ tone toward the subject, s
@ tone toward the reader, and
@ tone toward the self.

Though the analysis of tone is sometimes rather difficult, the
kdentification—or at least the detection of its exi is not 40

Effoctwe Wilting Skills For Advanced
Updated Bangla e-books(pdf): www.facebook.com/tanbir.ebooks
ficult. The foliwoing sections will fairly easily discuss the

three strings of tone

1. Tone toward the Subject

Actually, many attitudes toward one’s subject are possible. The
tone toward the subject may be objective expressing the reality as
it ts, with no intention to express one's feeling about It), advocative
(favoring or speaking for the subject), angry. ironical (sarcastic
attitude behind the guise (¥EC@™) of apparently sweet (STS zyz)
words), doubtful and so on. Let's see some examples

aifersere eh sagt a we corms oie or aepite oe eet ore
SP ware seat set, gee qreteles ere erate are earereh
a@tue aces ors ples suet aries ore exes) oe
were ween, were sare ot ce, Sfimefeors scutes Sees
ET OTE OH CTR EN COTS, EE CTMSNNTS SEER STENT Cort
ee See are a cos ores ere efcs eae |

— apes onfs

What's the attitude of the writer toward the “9ferfe"? Angry and
hostile, He's decisive (Eos) (“Se8" “>=TFeA"), But he's not
“autocratic” because he says, “2ifereers wie =a ef...” He
doesn't want to force the reader to follow or believe him. He's just
suggesting some ways (. . . CTH"! Si yt, . . GM SF) ET), His
purpose is to be cruel to some people to do something
“constructive”. So, his tone suits his purpose, It's very easy to
discover the existence of the writer's emotion in the passage. He's
not at all objective. But read the following passage.

wae Same Bere atery axe cess aes ase eH abe
wwe, wore Aeare ite eens oeen Sax —erreie Gineiee
fefeger ace | edara site eres cl corns ay rt wire cae
fe nee at aren Sowa oe AS ee) eee, os ot Te
= ef fant afer:

All e-books & Software : www.tanbircox.blogspot.com
Fines Avie Strife 253

The tone of the writer of the above passage is unemotional and
objective (as opposed to subjective}, His purpose is to describe in
iwiel an aspect of the nomenclature (att429 ete) used in the
chemical science, not to express his personal (subjective) feeling
ebout it

ons Sire sre om enre—cen Sr Set eM, Site store com
omares any fe a —ostee Co CN ST BSNS Eure ST CEN
WooGLT APHATEL TATE Te | BOTH aTeT afSaneA or
om Secs ost, Se sie Coeeer @ wis —ore went gare ate
ce a —e) Sfexest Samy) se or em ome, are oe
sree. cn | a cress Sree! oy ee efeced wey, Serer iret
wee eee fey | oe of exe cer Se Gre, ot ae ee
ee Gas Serene see | owe: Ape ares ot ofre sqewe ore
Or STE OE |

—sirres onid 5

Here the subject is the people of the "47s warez qi" (USA). As you
go through the passage. your attention Is attracted not only by
the vivid (2778) description. but also by the “inner personal voice
ot.the tone of the author. Though we face a string of sentences of
pungent (#7) mood, we can sense that an tronical (Co¥res,
#0") tone of the writer is peeping (3% Fes) through the curtain
(9) of words. In a word, the writer wants, so to say, to label the
subjects fie, people) as incomplete, mechanical human beings. Notice
the use of such words or phrases in the satirical sense : “SBa0",
“ONS” EPS CATER aren <a,” “aes. . areg.” “ere an
Om tre =," “tre: apeat of,” The writer ts, Sutspoken
(var, “er, but indirect. He doesn't directly.cSay what he
sate inoan Eenapo pe iyi a tee ho
than he has said. Here his tone has best suited his purpose -
caricature the reality by representing it vividly enough.

Sharpening your creativity involves some pleasant exertion as you
enrich your subconscious. As Michelangelo once said. “If people
Efloctve Wilting Sat For Advanced
Updated Bangla e-books(pdf): www.facebook.com/tanbir.ebooks
difficult. The follwoing sections will fairly easily discuss the above

three strings of tone.

1. Tone toward the Subject

Actually, many attitudes toward one’s subject are possible. The
tone toward the subject may be objective (expressing the reality as
it is, with no intention to express one’s feeling about it), advocative
(favoring or speaking for the subject), angry, ironical (sarcastic
attitude behind the guise (ft) of apparently sweet (SITE Tyz)
words), doubtful and so on. Let's see some examples.

wfereare wie wage <8 es corms Sie co ayia re cats ae
SR Here) Sent oer, wee weteiss wee) ares ee Serer
meres ere at cera weptena eet waerte ore es) ore
are ey, sare caret at cx, ffaenfetee srarfeeors eee
SEoH CONS AH CTU SEI CHS, 2B CHBOteNTS HGH IEA Cee
oe Oe et on re —cres ern farce ses OH

— safes ont

What's the attitude of the writer toward the “4fefé"s Angry and
hustile. He's decisive (3e7a) (Cae=7®" “az=Pfs27), But he’s not
“autocratic” because he says, “afereere we aa ef. ~ He
doesn't want to force the reader to follow or believe him. He's just
suggesting some ways (. . . COP St) Cre, . . . CRM EP cere), His
purpose is to be cruel to some people to do something
“constructive”. So, his tone suits his purpose. It's very easy to
discover the existence of the writer's emotion in the passage. He's
not at all objective. But read the following passage.

waren ere feere earn are) epreles alters reso on afte
wee, Wore weer ae eee teen Sth —azpreite Cnofiee
fifeqe sare | Sars sim eres cafe epee ol ot aire ear
af nene oh a Cae 82 BE TOR Sls, Erne a ares
& oof farts afm)

All e-books & Software : www.tanbircox.blogspot.com
ew Men Mere 253

The tone of the writer of the above passage is unemotional and
objective (as opposed to subjective), His purpose is to describe in
titel an aspect of the nomenclature (7729 16S) used in the
chemical science, not to express his personal (subjective) fweling
about it.

ones frre ore om SEE — Cas are Se EM, UE SE com
sores ere § acess) Core Care ere BOeE Guree wT OFT
YwOrtenn SENCeeR SIE sare HHT | tee sre Cafes cme
one Sirs orn, Se see Cerer of sfae—ore rnd gure Te
ore a — er Rfsxres fag) se cm at cre, ary rw
seaiiere cm) aa onten San! oy ere eSicen wey, free sre
exe oem fey Gt) om ce ers orem oe are, CR aw oe
won Ges Gere ae) cep tte ware «? Goce sage oe
or aTEee GE,

artes ona:

Here the subject is the people of the “4te ate qt" (USA). As you
go through the passage. your attention is attracted not only by
the vivid (e194) description, but also by the “inner personal voice”
ot the tone of the author, Though we face a string of sentences of
pungent (37) mood, we can sense that an tronical (coeTEs,
‘rFIE*} tone of the writer is peeping ($f Fre) through the curtain
(7) of words. In a word, the wrifer wants, so to say. to label the
wbjects (te, people) as incomplete. mechanical human beings. Notice
the use of such words or phrases in the satirical sense ; “S34",
“OG,” RTT CHR Seen Zan,” SIE, Parag,” ee, eon
te Sse ees,” “re wees 8” The writer is olitspoken
(ber, Perk), but indirect. He doesn't directly. sy what he
wants to mean. Perhaps that's why he has been abjé'to mean more
than he has said. Here his tone has best suited his purpose : to
caricature the reality by representing it vividly enough.

Sharpening your creativity involves some pleasant exertion as you
enrich your subconscious. Ax Michelangelo once said. “If people
E Wiiting Skis For Advanced Leamert
Updated Bangla e-books(pdf): www.facebook.com/tanbir.ebooks
knew how hard I worked to get my mastery, 1 wouldn't seem so

wonderful at all.” Nothing's free. Genius comes to a talented person
who does his komework,

—Gary Fellers,

Creativity for Leaders

What's the author's tone toward the subject “achievement”?
Confidence—that's what describes well his tone here. He believes
that creative feat (7124 781) is achievable by hard labor. His tone
is also encouraging because he wants to encourage the reader
toward hardwork. But “encouraging” is the tone if the tone toward
reader is considered.

2. Tone toward the Reader

The way a writer treats the reader is important. By this tone
writers interact with readers. They may be friendly, critical,
instructive, informal, or formal toward readers. In fact, there
are various possible tones.

There are two tragedies in life : not te get what the heart desires.
The other: to get it,
—G.B. Shaw

The author's tone toward the subject is. . what? Deterministic
He believes that what he has said is true and solid. But what's his
attitude toward the reader? The answer may not come to your
mind at the first thought. So what? Think twice. Does Shaw give
his readers any opportunity to share views with him? No. His role
is that of a lecturer. He's just giving teachings to his readers. So
his tone toward the reader is didactic (tending to teach). But see
the following example.

You undoubtedly know that over-p i ploy isa
common cause of problems. Thal Soe eg ak taalinn eat fo
All e-books & Software : www.tanbircox.blogspot.com

fiwe Aad Srle 255

thuny stress-related problems are caused by under-prometion as by
overpremotion,

— Dr. Vernon Coleman,

Stress Managennent Tuchniqnes

The author's tone toward the subject is conservative. But what's
iis tone toward the reader? Clearly. he talks directly with the
yeader, addressing him or her as “you”. He's not teaching the
reader anything. All he’s doing is just informing the reader, keeping
in consideration that the reader already knows something about
the subject. So, this is not a one-way communication: rather. it's a
lwoway communication,

It's often said that three things determine the value of real estute :

Lovation, location, and location, What will make your wealth

accumulation plan suceced? Again, three things: commitment,
and

—Dr, David J, Schwarze

The author's tone toward wealth accumulation plan {subject) is
optimistic. He believes it can*be made a success. But what's his
tone toward the reader? It may seem to you that that's
instructive. Right. But that’s not the major point. The major tone
js persuasive. He wants to persuade the reader to believe that
lw or she can succeed by continuous exercise of commitment. To
make his message/instruction convincing, the author has drawn an
analogy (31).
sf
é

3. Tone toward Self &

Consciously or unconsciously, the writer always féaves a part
of his or her treatment toward the self In higsSr her writing,
Sometimes he or she ts self-deceiving, sometimes masochistic,
sometimes dignifying and so on. If you've in your mind how you
want to have yourself discovered by your readers, and if conscious
about it while you're writing, then most probably your writing will
axcessfully meet your purpose.
256. Effective Sit For Actvanced Leamen
Updated Bangla e-books( Te www.facebook.com/tanbir.ebooks
Cc What one to Choose

Does everybody choose the tones he or she should have toward
the subject. reader, and self while writing?—vou may ask. The
answer is yes. Not all writers do this, but good writers do
Especially writers in the modern times do. Most of all. consciously
choosing tones in the planning or idea development phase can help
you write better, bringing sweet h y betwen your purpow
and your strategy. Suppose. for example. you're writing an essay
whose purpose is to persuade ("= secs =] sw Sats Saerits ez)
the the readers to accept some doctrine. You know your readers
level of education and general mental health Now, if you want te
make your writing a success. you must not only decide in advance
what your style should be but alse what tone you should choow
and what strategy you must follow. That is . Should you appeal
more to the readers emotion or to their reason? In tact. qood
writing emerges from 4 sound plan—about style, strategy or
approach, tone, diction. And in essence, these concepts are
interrelated, rather than independent

1. Tone and Purpose

As you've seen in purpose planning. draw up as pricisely as
possible a tone-and-purpose relationship before beginning your
writing. Your purpose. for example, may be one of educating.
simply informing, entertaining, persuading, (S3e°%= *),
ridiculing ("7% 71), arousing fear, surprising, discussing and
$0 on. So, you've to choose tones accordingly (oF saerh), Take
care your purpose doesnt contradict your tone. And, no doubt. to
ensure such harmony betwen your purpose and your tones. you've
to think over and over again before you start your essay. What's
equally necessary is revision and editing.

2. Tone and Style

As youll shortly see, just as your purpose determines your
fone, so your tone determines the style of your writing. Here. of
course, it should be pointed out that tone and style have a mutual
influence on each other ; sometimes the tone determines the style,
and sometimes the style determines the tone. But whatever the
case may be, they should match well.

All e-books & Software : www.tanbircox.blogspot.com
Vow And Sivter 257
D. How Tone Is Manifested

Suppose T select a tone or some tones to sult my purpose anc
vive” you may ask, “now how can ! produce them in my writing?”
A relevant question indeed. Every aspect of your lanquage—words,
sentences, mood and so on—conveys the tone. For more specific
and practical purposes. ber that the foll g eh are
the major “tone-beares™:

@ Verbs and their mood:

@ Sentence pattern (statement, in 2)

negative etc. They're also determined by the fom of the
verb);

s style (frag phatic construction,
repetition, sequence of sentences etc):

Organization of ideas;

The use of pronouns as subjects:

The use of contractions (eg, I'l, they're};

Connotation (implied ing) and d jon (direct
meaning) of words.

Let's take an example.

| want to see India free in my lifetime. But God may not

consider me {it enough to see the dream of my life fulfilled.

Then | shall quarrel not with him but with myself.
Frey canes

What's the Mahatma Gandhi's tone toward the subject. :tSedom?
Very obvious. It's positive and adoring. The verbal, phrase “want
jo see” and “shall quarrel with .. myself” convey the message that
he was longing for freedom. And what's his tone toward the
iwader? It's implied. Not that he just expresses his desire or merely
worms the reader of it, but he encourages the readers and
assures them of his determination and striving for freedom. And
what's his tone toward himself? Look at the phrase “may not
Wws17
Etfective Writing Stik For Advanced Leamen
Updated Bangla e-books(pdf): www.facebook.com/tanbir.ebooks

" It's clear that he's not arrogant (3%) or overconfident

about himself. On the contrary, he’s slightly doubtful about his

fitness, as all great people are. Now consider how his tone toward

himself heips him to present himself as a really polite, great, and

admirable personality. Again, by the phrase berg to see” he

expresses indirectly (and perh i ) that he has

caliente in Hiesill as far 0c his inlention end work land :not his

fate) are connected with his success, But if he, instead of saying

“want to see”, said "would like to see”, then he would not be able to

express so much confidence and commitment. But could he achieve

this end (le, making himself seem lofty and thus worth trusting) if
he wrote the passage like the following?

1 want to see India free in my lifetime. And I think I am fit
enough for this, If, however, my desire is not
fulfilled, 1 should perhaps blame God, and not myself.

Il. STYLE

A. What's Style?

What dress will you put on today? it depends on where you'll go
Likewise, a writer's style depends on what purp he or she has
in mind, what type of reader will read the essay, and what's the
situation in which he or she ts writing. Perhaps already you've
quessed what style is. It's the way you put your thoughts or ideas
into language. It's the sum of all the choices you've made about
words, sentences, paragraphs. But it's difficult to define style in
specific terms because there's much controversy over what's stile
and what it isn't. Some say that style is any particular and
conspicuously (STs) unique way of writing. Thus they attribute
specific styles to specific succesful writers or time and use the
terms “Hemmingway's style", “Elizabethan style,” “Academic style”,
“Eliot's style” and so on. In this sense. style Is a flexible concept.

almost endless variation.
All e-books & Software : www.tanbircox.blogspot.com
Tome Maul Stvle 259

Despite the undecided opinions about the concept, we can fairly
clearly identily three levels of styles.

B. Levels of Style

sweing examples, we now present it's major characteristics, It's
characterized by ;

{1) relatively long and ved it with f
thetorical devices such as parallel and periodic sentences;

(2) an extensive vocabulary which consists mainly of “Warned™
words [to be discussed later] and avoids abbreviations, contractions
(eg, Tl, they're, you've), colloquialisms (words, phrases, expressions
mainly used in conversations; idiomatic in nature) and slang;

(3) conservative (2) grammatical usage following the rules
of grammar to the letter;

(4) an impersonal tone fin which the subject is dominant, not
the writer as a person); and s

(5) a serious (@Te"82) and dignified attitude toward<the subject
and the reader. x

Belore citing and analyzing examples to explain this style,.a
look into words in their stylistic levels might be helpful.

Standard English may be formal, informal and colloquial.
Accordingly, words also can be grouped. as in a specific style
specific type(s) of words is used much. The vocabulary of educated
people can be grouped into five classes -

wv
269, Effective Writing Skis For Advanced Leamern
ipdated Bangla e-books(pdf): www. facebook.com/tanbir.ebooks
®@ popular words,

@ learned words,

@ idiomatic diction,
®@ colloquialisins, and
@ slang.

Popular words are those which the English-speaking people
learn naturally in the course“of their interaction with other people
in the society. These are common in the speech of educated and
uneducated people. Nobody has to learn these words with special
academic efforts. These words are the basic elements of the
English lanquage, and belong to the whole populace.

Learned words, on the other hand, are not common to
people of all levels of the society. Nor can they be acquired through
the interaction of everyday life. They need to be “learned” with
special and deliberate efforts, even by the English-speaking people,
let alone the non-natives. Consequently. they only belong to the
educated people, Such words are more often written than spoken.
and they're used mostly in the formal style.

Idiomatic phrases are units having special meanings different
from the sum of the meanings of their constitutent parts, For
example, hard up is an idiomatic phrase. It has a meaning totally
different from the meanings of its constitutent parts “hard” and
“up”. That's why the meanings of idiomatic phrases can't be
predicted by the meanings of the words which form them. And
because idioms are traditional rather than logical, they can be
learned only by experience, not by rule. Idioms most frequently
occur in informal and colloquial styles of writing. One thing, by the
way, you must remember - idioms have special flavor and

lity, and ti histories; so don't use them in your
wilting without fully knowing their mood and connotation {implied
sense).

Colloquialisms are words and phrases characteristic of
ordinary or very familiar conversation rather than formal speech or
writing. It's not that they're slovenly, undesirable, or incorrect, but
their use should be limited to informal and colloquial styles. They

All e-books & Software : www.tanbircox.blogspot.com

Tone And Strte 261

can, however, be used to create conversations among educated
people. For example, they're frequently used in novels, stories,
dramas. case studies, personal letters, and other types of dialogs.
Calloquialisms include popular words and idiomatic constructions.
They also include learned words with different and popularized
meanings and clipped words (as “ad” for “advertisement)”.

According to the Oxford Dictionary, slang means “language of
» highly colloquial type.” So, slangs are not vulgar (S4#1), incorrect,
or nonstandard. Slang is used at all social levels. It's use is,
h . less frequent amony educated speakers. But though
educated people don't use it in formal situations (eg, meetings,
seminars), they use it in personal and private conversations. It
should be used only in conversations of a private nature, if used in
writing

Here are some examples of each type of word.

Popular Learned

ae =

fon, 3 Sct

at cae)

# a

wea en fabs =n

agree concur

beagar mendicant

break fracture (iB)

clear lucid

end terminate

begin commence os
fat obese, corpulent &
make easy facilitate Ss
truth veracity ee
secret cryptic s
surrender capitulate

Idioms : all in all, fight shy of, bag and baggage, do up, watch
out, come in handy, call at, meddle with, eat into etc.
t
Updated Bangla e-books(pdf): www.facebook.com/tanbir.ebooks
alibi oat, SES)

All e-books & Software : www.tanbircox.blogspot.com
Towne Avtet Stvbe 263

Slang : brass (army), ham (theater}, behind the eight ball (pool,
on the beam (radio), southpaw (baseball), no sweat. flipped, cool.
wick (disqusted), swell (good), kickback, windbag etc.

{For usable reference lists of such words, see Writers’
Grammar by this author].

Back to our main point, we were discussing about the formal
ttyle of written English. The following example fairly illustrates this
iyle.

The true problem of living—in politics, economics, education.
Murriage, cic —are always problems of ing Or ling
pposites. They are divergent problems and have no solution in the
ondinary sense of the word. They demand of man not merely the
aploy of his ing powers but the commitment of his
whole p lity. Naturally, spurious solutions, by way of &
clever formula, are always being put forward; but they never work
for long. because they invariably neglect one of the two opposites
and thas lose the very quality of human life. In economics, the
solunon offered may provide for freeedom but not for planning, or
vice versa. In industnal organisation, 1 may provide for discipline
but not for workers’ participation in management, of vice versa. In
politics, it might provide for leadership without democracy os,
again, for democracy without leadership.

small ix beqgtiful
a
‘=

2 Ro
The use of such learned words and phrases as recopitile (for reunite
or adjust), divergent (for disagreeing or different), spurious (lor
deceitful, sham, or phoney), put forward {for propose, suggest)
characterizes the passage as of formal style. Notice the impersonal
tone {the frequent use of the passive voice}, the parallel
arrangement of sentences (in economics, . . « In industrial

Socratic irony takes its name from the fact that, as he is represented
OS BlGtirs Bishigiea he (iiakdisliplnee’ SCAR URaMlih WR’ BS
pose of ig an cag: to be i J. and 9 modest
readiness to entertain adverse opinions proposed by others:
although these, upon his continued questioning, always tum out to

be ill grounded oF to fead to absurd consequences.
— M. H. Abrams
Observe the involved long sentence. The whole passage ts but one
sentence! The whole idea could be presented by a number of
shorter sentences. It would be easier to read. But the author didn't
do that.

2. Colloquial Style

” A colloquial style is fundamentally the style used by educated
people when speaking informally to thelr social equals.” [ts
comparable to the decent (4) “#4 #f" in Bangla. Basically a
spoken style, it’s characterized by -

(1) relatively short simple sentences, often grammatically
incomplete, with few rhetorical devices:

(2) a generous use of contractions (Ill we've, they're, it’s),
clipped words (fridge, math, exam, cab, bus, outo, tax!, phone), and
the omission of relative pronouns (that, who, which) which are
retained in a formal style:

(3) a vocabulary charactarized by liberal avoidance of learned
words and by inclusion of some less objectionable slang terms;

(4) @ simplified grammatical structure which depends heavily on
idiomatic constructions and sometimes ignores the subtle
distinctions of formal grammar; and

(5) & personal or familiar tone which tries to create the
impression of speaking in a friendly way to the reader

All e-books & Software : www.tanbircox.blogspot.com
Fist Arwi Shfe 265
Here's an example.

I was always a stickler about who my daughters palled around with
From kindergarten up. there were usually a Jot of kids at our howe,
and I thought it was important to know who they were. | didn't
give them interviews, but if L thought they were weird, | wasn't
afraid to say so, My kids’ [ends ate dinner with us offen and they
talked about their parents, so | knew what kind of homes they carne
from,

If there was one arca where | was too dictatorial, it was in how
late they could say out, | had a rule that wherever they were. the
girls had to call in. And 1 was tough on their curfews. They could
be out until cleven-thirty from the age of sixteen. and when they
teached eighteen. they could be out enti! midnight.

They were never allowed to be out Ul! two or three in the
morning unless it was for sotvething very special, And even then
they had to let me know whom they were with and whefe they
were.

You know that old saw that comes on at night on TV stations:
“Ws eleven o'clock. Do you know where your children are?" 1
dlways knew where my children were. The kids used t» complain:
“When we're married. you'll be telling us when to be in And you
know what? Damned if they weren't right.

— Lee lacocca
Notice, here, the use of stickler [informal], pal around Jang.
meaning make intimacy with (3 #21)) kid informal, ipod child),
you know what [colloquial], damn [inf 1 & slangl. Al iso notice
the familiar conversational tone, the short sentences”
Here's another example.

ore Se a cary are wrerente fairat: dre once a) sree eC
Re Ye SATE ee) ee we Ce, eee fee oe are eee ere fee
Sie oneeene gow Sere wT TECH TCS SOM Wee STE
Effective Si For Advanced
Updated Bangla e- reid aod www. facebook.com/tanbir.ebooks
style, h is not in decent situations.

like “widreS een”, xe Fem 9G OF" are not permissible either in
formal writing or in informal-but-gentle conversations. But they can
be used in dialogs to represent real-ife situations where they suit
Of course. if objectionable (=1*f84%) slangs are not used, English
colloquial style may be used in writings of an intimate nature. but
it's never permissible in college writing.

3. Informal Style

It’s the midway betwen formal and colloquial styles, Its sentece
patterns are less involved than those of formal English. But it
doesn't mean that the sentences are a3 loose or fragmentary (ic.
incomplete) as colloquial patterns. This style avoids the obligatory
requirements of forma! grammar. but is not dominated by
conversational idiomatic usages. It may use learned words, but it
prefers idiomatic expressions and easy words. Its tone may be
serious like that of formal style, but it doesn't pretend to be
dignified. It also may maintain the informality of the colloquial style,
but it avoids the easy going familiarity of the latter. Fragmants are
sometimes found in the informal style, but not too often. It may
address the reader directly as "you" or use contractions. This is the
most useful all-purpose style, Sometimes it may come closer to the
formal style, sometimes to the colloquial; but it never merges with
either extreme. In its broad range come much. narration and
description, many reports of events, most nontechnical exposition,
and critical and argumentative papers addressed to general readers.
Most modem novels, essays. stories. and magazine and newspaper
articles are informal. Most of the lectures and speeches you listen
to and many of the textbooks you study—including this one—are
informal. The following are some examples.

Having mentally clarified the purpose and the subject of your
article, it is now possible to plan it in some detail. Start with 4
blank sheet of parer. At the top, write the subject. This ix not yet
the title, merely a working guide.

All e-books & Software : www.tanbircox.blogspot.com
lime Amd Sete

Neat. working from the notes and papers that are the prostact
of your research, list the facts and fancies that are to make up your
article. The list, at this stage, will be in no particulat order ; it is
just a list, Review the facts, ete. Have you cnvugh to really fill an
article of the length you plan? If net, can you get more?

Remember. though, that an article cannot be merely an
assembly of unsweetened facts. The facts must be made palatable.
The reader must be interested. So perhaps you de have enough
factual material after all, Perhaps what you lack is the jam filling
that makes the doughnut? Can you find some unusual, and
therefore interesting. snippet of information. of an amusing story,
to eaven the factual lump?

Once you are contented that you have enough material—or
better, a Tittle too much, so that you can be choosey—you arc
ready to shape your material to a plan. Here | cannot belp you
much. Only you can decide on the format of structure that you
should adopt: the order in which you present the facts and fancies
on offer.

You can plan your article so that the facts follow each other in
historical order. Or you can arrange them as a story, with historical
flashbacks. “How-to-do-it” articles are of course best structured ina
sequential form. But other practical advice articles are sometimes
best structured with the most important advice first or last.

venecpraceaist 4 tema Spates beaieeraeic dasa ameatalatina cd
be logical; that the facts fit together sensibly. Aad of ought
they retain the reader's interest. &

medonwells,
The Craft of Writing Articles

Still in shock, | stumbled about the house trying to decide what to
put inte the suitcases. Earlier that evening Td received a call from
my home town telling me that my brother and his wife, her sister

267
fective Skilts For Actvanoed
Updated Bangla e-books(pdf): www.facebook.com/tanbir,ebooks
and the sister's children, had been killed in a car accident.

“Come as soon as you can,” begged my mother.

That's what 1 wanted to do—to leave at once, to hurry to my
parents. But my husband Larry and | were in the midst of packing
fo move. Our house was in shambles.

While Larry phoned frends and made plane reservations for the
following morning. | looked at all the tasks that should be taken
care of —and did nothing. | couldn’ focus. Occasionally, someone
would ask to speak to me with the offer, “If there's anything | can
do, pleac fet me keow.” "Thank you. thank you very much,” I'd
reply. But I didn’t know what to ask for. | was too confused to
concer ate.

The bell rang and 1 opened the door to sce Emerson King
standing oo the pore. “Donna had to stay with the baby.” he said.
“but we want (o help you. | remember when my father died, it took
me hours lo get the children’s shoes cleaned and shined for the
funeral. So that's what I've come to do for you. Give me all your
shoes,”

T hadn't even thought about shoes. Now I remembered that Erie
had waded through the mud with his good shoes the previous
Sunday. Maghan had kicked stones with hers, scuffing the toes I'd
tossed the shoes aside, intending to clean them Later.

Emerson's request gave me something specific to do. While be
spread newspapers on the kitehen floor, | gathered Larry's dress
shoes. his everyday shoes. my heels. my flats. the children’s dirty
shoes, Emerson settled himself on the floor and got to work.
Watching him concentrate on one task belped me pull my own
thoughts in order, Laundry first, | told myself, While the washing
mactune worked, | bathed the children and put them to bed.

While I cleared the dinner dishes, Emerson continued to work,
saying sothing, 1 thought of Jesnus washing the feet of his

All e-books & Software : www.tanbircox.blogspot.com
fhe And Strte

disciples, He had knelt, serving his friends, ewen as this man now
knelt, serving us. The love in this act released my tears at bast.
healing rain tw wash the fog from my mind. I could move. Leould
think. One by one, the jobs fell into place.

1 went into the laundry room to put some clothes into the
drier, reteming to the kitchen to find Emerson bad belt. Lined
agaist one wall were all our shoes, spotless, gleaming.

Now, whenever | hear of an acquaintance who has lost a loved
one, Tao longer call with the vague offer, “If there's anything | can
do” T try tw think of one specific task that suits that person's
teed—washing the car, taking the dog 10 the boarding kennel,
house-sitting during the funeral.

And if the person says to me, “How did you know T needed
that done?” | reply, “It's because a man once cleaned my shoes.”

—by Maggy Harrash in Reader's Digest.
270 Effective Whiting Stilts For Advanced Lecter
Updated Bangla e-books(pdf): www.facebook.com/tanbir.ebodks
Comparison T:

STYLISTIC LEVELS WHERE USED
Formal 1. Relatively long 1. Books end articles on
(mains wenitten, sentences. complex scholarly of technical
seldom spoken) Structure, use of many subjects. written for

thetorical devices. experts in the hekt
2 Extensive wocatadary, 2. “Belles letters” « nowels.
“Warned” words | emays. stories. poems,
3 Absence ot written for highly educated
, contractions, | waders

orntited relative pronoun, | 9. Prepsred serious or
and other collopaal ceremontil addness to
Sore testrcted auchences
Grammatical usage which
Observes
genetaby ignored in popular
speech.
& Imperonal ione
gralied attitude toward
petyect ated readies

Informal Overlaps formal and 1 Books and artiches on

(written and spoken, | colloquial styles. but avoats | important mbyects. but for

the general level of =| the extermes of geen

educated writting ant Most novels, esuy.
of educated. deliberate Poems, magazine
speech) Rewspaper articles arc
editorials.
3. Most college writting
4. Most speeches to
general auchences: the al
educated speakers in formal
Shor entences, senple | 1. Light, chatty writing
Conversational i structure, usally in for general readers.
(more often spoken t order, 2. Dialogue in fiction, and
that wtitteri} few devices any writting which
Many contractions, attempts to catch the
dipped thythms of conversation
tendency to ont 3. The letters of educated

telative pronours and other | people to mtimate friends

constructions not 4. Aknost all the
fwaneng conversations of educated

3 Few “Warned” words, people when they are at
expressions, | ease

the use of hess obgectionatie

SOURCE « M McCrimpon, Writing With A Purpose, Houghton Millie:
Company, Boston (1950)

All e-books & Software : www.tanbircox.blogspot.com
(ane And Stele zn
D. Which Style to Choose

This is where you should be careful. You should choose the stylist:
level most appropriate to your purpose, and, most of all, you should
toy with it all through, Don't mix up two or all three styles in the
same writing. Incongruous diction spoils the writing, It's a mistake
mere severe than grammatical mistake, because it creates confusion
ood often leads to ludicrousness. If your subject is mainly
information-oriented, in which the writer's own opinion or
perception ts of litthe importance (such as research papers or
reports of a formal nature), then, to avoid confusion, choose the
formal style, In other cases, and in most of the cases, you can
choose the informal style. But | may remind you that, in the
modem times, an increasing number of books are being seen to be
written in the colloquial style.

Again, if you've decided about the tone, then make sure your
style fits in with it. At this stage you may again go through the
purpose planning chapter for better understanding.

In chosing the style as well as the tone, it may prove helpful to
visualize the following purpose-tone-style triangle.

PURPOSE

TONE STYLES

The diagram is self-explanatory. Yet | may clarify : Purpose
determines tone and style. Tone and style, however, influence each
other.
272 Effective Sidits For Advanced Learnen
Updated Bangla e-books(pdf): www.facebook.com/tanbir.ebooks
A Example

The following ts the beginning of a book titled “How to Talk So
People Listen" by Sonya Hamlin. Notice the author's tone and
style. Also notice how friendly and funny she is with her readers.
She has assumed the appropriate tone and followed the required
style {colloquial) as far as her purpose is concerned. After all, she's
teaching her readers how to talk by directly talking to them.

Hellow, fm Sonya Halim.
How can a book about communicating hegin from anywhere

chew?

Anywhere else than acknowledging the typical order by which
we all make contact with cach other? And then using it. step by
step, with youT

pr + L ye + L .

WWW. J ACeb00K. COM / tant. O00KS

All e-books & Software : www.tanbircox.blogspot.com
THE REAL HAPT
BIRTH OF 25 _

AN ESSAY 13

tws—is

Thought ts the child of action
— Benjamin Disraeli
Action is the beginning of thoughts
—S.M.2.H
Practice makes one perfect
— Proverb
lt is possible to imitate Voltaire without
being Voltaire
— Frederick the Great
A good imitation is the most perfect
originality
— Voltaire
No man was ever great by imitation
— Samuel Johnson
CHAPTER
OUTLINE ,

A. The Plans Revisited

B. What this Chapter Is About

C, Fine-Tuning Your Writing :
An Exhaustive Self-Training

The Beal Berth Of An Essay 275
A. The Plans Revisited

Most of us die many times before our death: but very few ore born
twice. Sounds funny? But it’s a fact. .

Unfortunately enough, most of the writing by most of the
novice writers face an even worse fate. They die before their very
birth! Consequently, it's only when they rot that they reach the
reoders. And what happens later is easily understandable : no
sooner do the readers complete reading the first one or two
wntences than they feel bored, desparately wishing to throw the
esay off. And so they do. All of us—as readers—have had such
sullocating experience, | think.

So, as a writer, how can you ensure a successful birth of an
essay? That's no easy task. It demands hard labor.

The only known way of ‘ensuring a long—sometimes very
long—ife of a piece of writing is ensuring that it ls born more than
once before it reaches the readers. That definitely demands you to
hatch (1 Gam) the idea considerably well; that is. to plan as
elaborately as required. As we've seen, the plans are

@ Purpose Plan,
@ Idea Development, and
@ Writing Pian.

The more familiar you are with vour own plan. the better the
preparation for the later steps. So, spend as much time as you're
allowed brooding over such plans, When you're confident enough
that you're ready to write, start writing. Then complete it. But
with most of the novice writers, the real writing begins just dere—
alter the first draft has been made. And that's what this chapter is
about.

SP
°

B. What this Chapter Is About

Wf you're a novice writer, then in your first draft perhaps you only
jotted down a disconnected crowd of words and sentences—
sometimes a jumble of sentences smacking of only the meaning but
no beauty. Then you must “fine-tune” your style : revise the diction
76 Effective Writing Skilis For Advanced
Updated Banglae-books(pdf): www.facebook.com/tanbir.ebooks

of and phrases) and rearrange the sentences. Some
writers, however, may have to go back to the planning and
strategic phase to modify the plans themselves. But most writers
may not have to go back so far. They most probably will have to
begin the revision at the diction level. In this chapter well practice
some fine-tuning examples - we'll rearrange and/or combine
sentences, adjust words to the desired style and tone, and
simultaneously apply all the techniques we've learnt in this book
It's desirable that you practice the examples—or at least go
through them—as many times as you think you should.

C. Fine-Tuning Your Writing : An Exhaustive
Self-Training

© 01 eet race ton econcis hve. ft nnd sorte

the entire f ics. (2) Within this framework
economic activity takes nish as given, so to say. (3) Here given
means p and ind: ctible. (4) E have felt so

with tolerably good reason, (5) It was no part of their job to study
the effects of Soe ey por ae framework. (6) It was no
part of their prof comp 2. There is now increasing
evidence of environmental decli (7) Such decline is seen
particularly in living nature. (8) That is why economists are calling
Into question the entire outlook and methodology of economics. (9)
The study of economics is very narrow and very fragmentary, (10)
As a result such a study can not lead to valid insights. (11) This will
continue unless the study is helped and completed by a study of
meta-economics.

REQUIREMENT :
Rewrite the above passage to accomplish the following ends.

TONE : Objective (Unemotional; the writer as a person is
not important, only the finding is important. So,
use the passive voice as far as possible.)

STYLE : Formal : dignified words and involved sentences.

All e-books & Software : www.tanbircox.blogspot.com
Ie Resal Birth (f Ant Essay 277

FINE-TUNING : Let's see what the author himself has done.
He has combined sentences (1), (2), (3). and (4) into one sentence
as follows -

Until fairly recently the economists have felt entitled, with
tolerably good reason, to treat the entire framework within
which economic activity takes place as given, that ts to say, as
permanent and indestructible.

He has combined sentences (5) and (6) as follows :

ht was no part of their job and, indeed, of their professional
competence, to study the effects of economic activity upon the
tramework

See how he has combined sentences (7) and (8) -

Since there is now increasing evidence of environmental
deterioration, particularly in living nature, the entire outlook and
methodology of economics ts being called into question.

Also see what he has done with sentences (9), (10), and (11) -

The study of economics is too narrow and too fragmentary to
lead to valid insights. unless complemented and completed by a
study of meta-economics.

Now read the eleven-sentence passage again and compare it
with the following version (original).

Until fairly recently the economists have felt entitled, with
tolerably good reason, to treat the entire framework within which
economic activity takes place as given, that ix to say, as permanent
and indestructibte. It was no part of their job and, indeed, of thelr

outlook and methodology of economics is being Zalled into

question. The study of economics is wo nitrow and too

fragmentary to lead to valid insights, unless complemented and
completed by a study of meta-cconomics.

— EF Schumacher.

sovall is heautifial
278, Effectve Writing Suits for Advanced Lacmners
ipdated. Bangla e-books(pdf): www.facebook.com/tanbir.ebooks
CAUTION : Not that the same idea could not be put down in

some other way. It could. And then also the writing might be
effective. But the original writing is a very good one. Practicing this
way will give you much insight into various ways of sentence
handling and Word-choosing. We're not imitating others’ diction:
rather, we're exploring into the depth of their craftsmanship and
the huge arsenary of their techniques. So. please don't imitate
them in the literal sense of the word. Just familiarize yourself with
good writings of good writers.

@ Westermark says, Marriage is rooted in family rather than
family in marriage.’ This view would have been a truism in pre-
Christian times. But since the advent of Christianity it has become
an important proposition, This proposition needs to be stated with
emphasis. .Christianity introduced an entirely novel view of
marriage. More particularly, St. Paul introduced such a novel view,
The view declared that it (= marriage) existed to prevent the sin of
fornication (fee). It did not primarily exist for the production of
children,

REQUIREMENT :

TONE : Impersonal

STYLE : Formal; involved sentences

The original paragraph ts as follows.

‘Marriage’, says W: k. ‘ts rooted in family rather than

family in marriage. This view would have been 9 truism in pre-

Christian times, but since the advent of Christianity it has become

an important proposition needing wo be stated with emphasis.

Christianity, and more particularly St Paul, introduced an entirely

novel view of marriage, that it existed not primarily for the

procreation of children, but to prevent the sin of fornication.
— Bertrand Russell
Marriage and Morals

@ Vo not bother what people—the auditors. coleagues,
neighbours—will say. These thoughts will undesirably keep you

All e-books & Software : www.tanbircox.blogspot.com

The Rivet Birth Of Att Essery 279

ying. Ri ber the story of the father. the son. and the
donkey They went to the market. What will people think of us?—
they thought They got so Influenced by that thought that the
{other could not ride the donkey. The son also could not ride the
donkey for the same reason. Well. do what you think ts right. Do
what you think is proper. Do that as lang as it is not in your selfish
terest. Go ahead and do it. Remember, you can always rectify
your wrong decisions the moment you find them to be wrong. I
you do not take any decision at all, you will never be able to
iniprove your future decision making.

REQUIREMENT :

Make the writing tight (concise)

TONE : Suggestive but friendly

STYLE = informal

PURPOSE : To educate and persuade/motivate.

Now see how the author has arranged words and sentences to

achieve the above goals: Compare your own modified writing with
the author's.

Do pot bother what people will say ,.. what the auditors will say
. what colleagues will say... what neighbours will say, These
we immobilising thoughts. Remember the story of the father,
the son and the donkey going to the market. They got so influenced
by what people thought of them that neither could ride the donkey.
Well, do what you think i right, what you think m proper and so
jony as it is not in your selfish interest, go ahead and dot,
Remember. you can always rectify your wrong dedisioa’ the
moment you find them to be wrong. On the other handit yi do
hot take any decisions at all, how will you ever be abit to improve
your future decision making.
— Promext Batra,
Simple Woys to Manage Stress

@ imagine the blueprint for the ideal reader who, being lively.
very curious, and always ready to be amused, will write warmly
Effective Writing SR For Advonced Leaner
Updated Bangla e-books(pdf): www.facebook.com/tanbir.ebooks
ive letters to an saying, "| really laughed, enjoyed
$0 much. | read it to my dad and he liked it too,”

My ideal reader is aged about seven, full of mnagination and
enthusiasm, which is why | write for five to eight year olds. ard
why | find it such a rewarding market.

For the writer. these beginner readers make a market that |»
growing, and, with the recent publicity sbout children’s reading. i ts
a market that promises to be with us for a long time-

After a child has learnt to read, the next stage is reading a real
book alone. Luckily, the child, who wants simple but enjoyable
stories that are easy to read and attractive to handle, attends a
school where teachers care passionately about books

REQUIREMENT : The above sent are involved
characteristic of a formal style. though the words are not learned
and gravely moody. Rewrite the passage.

PURPOSE : To share ideas and experiences with the reader

TONE : Friendly, familiar, plain.

STYLE: Informal: short sentences, directly addressing the

reader as ‘you’.

Here's the original writing .

Imagine the blueprint for the ideal reader. He or she ts lively, very
curious, always ready to be amused. This reader will write warmly
appreciative letters t an author, ‘I really Laughed. | enjoyed it so
much. I read it wo my dad—and he liked it too.”

There you are, My ideal reader is aged about seven, full of
imagination and enthusiasm, That's why | write for five to cight
year olds, and why | find it such a rewarding market,

In the trade, they're known as beginner readers. For the writer
it’s a market that’s growing. And with the recent publicity about
children’s reading, it's a market that promises to be with us for a
Jong time. :

Suppose a child has just learned to read, The next stage is
reading a book—a real book—alone, With luck, the child attends a

All e-books & Software : www.tanbircox.blogspot.com

(oe Mound Birtiy OF Ave Basery’ 281

school where teachers care passionalely about books. They want
simple but enjoyable stones, easy to read, attractive ty hasndhe,

— Anne Forsyth,

from the British Magazine

"Writer's Monthly”

© Evesibods’s work needs polishing, since there ts very little
writing that cannot be “tightened up” and since there are very few
writers whose work is not occasionally unclear. Possibilities are
always there of an imprecise word slipping in. To expurgate ail the
irregular writing. the work must be reviewed.

The process of reading the whole article through to oneself
again, aloud but ina whisper, will help identify the phrases that
were thought to look good on paper but which cannot easily be
spoken aloud. Those long words and jargons (“#8t%), which may
have been used and which others may find anomalous should also
be identified.

REQUIREMENT =

The above passage is written in a formal style. As you can see,
the sentences are long and involved, and—truth to tell—are
sometimes unnecessarily made so. The idea is attractive. So you
want to rewrite it in an informal style to make it easily understand-
able, Also, you want to talk directly to the reader.

PURPOSE: To give valuable suggestions to the reader

TONE : Intimate but dignified
STYLE : Informal (as has already been said)
STRATEGY : Short sentences; easy words ot

So, reuite the passe in your om sey and then come it with
the original one that is given below. os
s
Everybtexly’s work needs polishing. There is very hithe writing that
cannot be “tightened up"; there are very few writers whose work ts
not occasionally unclear, there is always a possibility that an
imprecise word has slipped in. To weed out all the “ess-than- good”
writing, you must review your work,
Effective Writing Skits For Advanced
Updated Bangla e-books(pdf): www.facebook.com/tanbir.ebooks

Read the whole article through to yourself again, aloud. but in
a hushed whisper. This process will identify the phrases that you
thought looked good on paper bat which cannot easily be spoken
aloud: It showld also identify the long words and the jargon which

you may use without thinking. but that others may find unusual
— Gondon Wells

Notice the use of anaphora in the first paragraph (Three
successive sentences begin with the same word).

R tic love ched its peak in the romantic
movement. You may take Shelley as its chief pioneer. Shelley fell
in low. When he fell in love he was filled with keen emotions and
er load thoughts. These emotions and thoughts lent
th to sion in poetry, Naturally enough, the emotion
{hat prodiced these reniiik’ Was’ Ghiolly $004. That is why he saw
no reason why love should ever be ined. His arg it.
however, rested upon bad psychology The obstacles to his
desires—and nothing else—ted him to write poetry.

REQUIREMENT :

The above writing is loose: it's unnecessarily wordy; the
primary idea is delayed. Rewrite it.

TONE: Criticizing but imp I. Dont address the reader

STYLE : Formal. Use dignified words. Use tough and learned
words consciously so that the criticizing tone
becomes apparent. Write as tightly as possible in
involved sentences.

Draft your own version and compare it with the original one given
below.

Romantic love reached its apogee in the romantic movement, and

one may perhaps take Shelley as its chief apostle. Shelley when he

fell in love was filled with exquisite emotions and imaginative

thoughts of a kind lending themselves to expression in poetry;
All e-books & Software : www.tanbircox.blogspot.com
the Real Birth Of Ant Boay 283

naturally enough. he considered thut the emotion that produced
these results was wholly good, und he saw no teascn why love
should ever be restrained. His argument, however, rested upon bad
pychology. It was the obstacles to his desires that led him te write
fostry,
— Bertrand Russell
Knowing when to push hard and when to stop pushing is
one of the most important secrets of good management. Though
everybody knows that they have to push hard to get the best out
wl people, pushing too hard can be counterproductive. Too many
inonagers use their staff carelessly and without thought. One will
io well to think carefully whether one is ever guilty of pushing
«e's staff too hard. Whipping a donkey does not do-any good if
ihe donkey ts already going as fast as it can.

REQUIREMENT :
PURPOSE: = Educate the reader by talking with him or her in

TONE : Direct. conversational, friendly
STYLE : Informal. Clear and short sentences.
STRATEGY : To arrange sentences jn such a way that
important pieces of information or message
gets clear focus.
So. rewrite the passage. Please do. Then compare your version
with the following original one. Notice how bits of message are
locused in different paragraphs. Remember, your writing may not
te bod, yet a comparison will enable you to look into the author's
method. Dont fall in love with your own sive until youre Sure it's
eppreciated by others. oN

It's one of the most important scerets of iesokcibaeagiiiient
knowing when to push hard and when to stop pushing.

You have to push hard ty yet the best out of people. Everyone
knows that. But pushing too hard can be counterproductive.

Too many managers uxe their staff carelessly and without
thought.
UD -Ge shepuah. ths. dollewinag passoas-cavelullyianbi r.ebooks

When you know how to get winning ideas, it is a very simple
matter to get them, Just as you have to put capital in a bank to get
imterest therefrom, so you have to put facts in your mind to get a
idea out of it, Then in due course your mind will pay you interest on
the facts in the form af ideas.

REQUIREMENT :

PURPOSE : To persuade

TONE : Friendly and suggestive,

STYLE : Informal. Direct and clear writing.

Rewrite the passage to achieve the above goals. Then
compare your writing with the original one given below,

It's a very simple matter io get winning idecas—when you know
how, Getting an idea is like geting interest from a bank. To get
inierest owt you've first got to pul capital in. To get an idea out of
your mind, you've first got to put facts in. Then in duc course your
mind will pay you interest on the facts in the form of ideas.
—W.G Clifford

Now a fact. The great Indian leader Mr. Nehru, while at
Cambridge, used to rewrite the poems of Robert Frost during his
leisure time. He used to do it not to imitate Frost, but to familiarize
himself with his styke and feed himself with the real touch of the
poems. We all know the consequence. He was later on regarded as
one of those Indians who had extraordinary mastery over the
English language.

All e-books & Software : www.tanbircox.blogspot.com
THE PARAGRAPH
, THE BASIC UNIT CHAPTER

OF COMPOSITION 1 4

The real craft of writing lies in the writing
of the paragraph.

ey uny pumps LL y 7 in W It 1,
WWW. [AC 000K. com/ CANO. €O0OKS
@

1. THE PARAGRAPH

E. Topic Sentence and The Paragraph
Il, PARAGRAPH DEVELOPMENT METHODS

@

Ht 1 Ws
ww. jacebook.com/tanbir.e

r

All e-books & Software : www.tanbircox.blogspot.com
the Neengnaph «The Base Unit of Gampodtion: 287
I. THE PARAGRAPH
A. What's a Paragraph?

The term paragraph can't be defined in a simple way. In some
cases. even a single sentence or word serves as a paragraph when
epecial emphasis is required. But, generally, 3 paragraph is a group

ol sentences—

@ dealing with one idea only:

@ arranged systematically;

@ having a clear beginning, development. and ending; and
@ having o completeness in itself.

‘A paragraph is, in fact, a composition in miniature (Eafe) but
complete in itself. In other words, it requires much the same
process of composition as a whole essay, though in smaller scope.
Just as an essay has a purpose—the thesis, so has a paragraph—
the topic sentence. There must be a concrete (™%, qetaftey
Mructure in an essay through which the idea should flow smoothly
toward the end: so must there in a paragraph In short, 4
paragraph is a short essay.

B. The Body of The Paragraph

As has already been implied. only a group of sentences which have
not been arranged arround a specific topic sentence (implied or
stated) can't be called a paragraph. Ina paragraph, there must be a
logically complete piece of ides. But ideas are always expressed in
words in such cases. The completeness and appropriateness of an
dea demands that the arrangement of sentences needed to ggipress
it also be complete and appropriate. In other words, a gMuctured
\dea needs a structured expression (eg, language, words). So every
well-written paragraph has not only a wir thought
structure but also a definite physical (@afe#, } structure
which can be anatomized (a4 FI, co facet 4a), Thus the
whole body of a paragraph can be divided into three main parte the
beginner, the developer, and the terminator (ending). The following
diagram shows such a conceptual division (@@u frerea) of the
paragraph body.
Effectiee Witting Skis For Advonced Learner
Updated. Bangla e-books(pdf) www facebook cam/tanhir ebooks

Ys

lf the paragraph is not a part of a bigger essay, the beginne:
and the terminator serve literally (208s =¢) as the beginning and
the ending, respectively. The beginning, for example, may be an
introduction telling the readers what's coming next in the
developer, or it may ptesent 4 generalization the proof of which will
follow. It may present any other aspect of the developer. Whatewr
ft starts with, it must signal to the readers that it's the beginning
of an organized idea. As to the terminator. it's not necessary that
it present a conclusion of something. But whatever it presents. it
should make the readers feel that the idea that was developed in the
developer now ends here in a natural way. That is, it should be
effective enough to declare the end of the idea that began with the

Terminator

lf, however, the paragraph is a part of a bigger essay—as it &
in most of the cases—thdn, over and above (87914) doing the above-
mentioned functions. the beginner and/or the terminator must
have an additional function of building transition (47%) of thought
from the previous paragraph into itself and/or from itself into the
paragraph that comes next. Hf, for example, the technique of
backward transition (See CHAPTER-9) is followed in the essay,
then the beginner should do this transition-building function, as
shown in the following figure.

All e-books & Software : www.tanbircox.blogspot.com
Hee Paragraph: The Betsie Unit of Compeasitions 289

4

lf, on the other hand, the technique of forward transition
(See CHAPTER-9) is used in the essay. then the terminator does
thts function of transition-building. See the following picture.

Effective Wilting Suit For Advanced Learnen

Updated Bangla e-books(pdf): www. facebook.com/tanbir.ebooks
If, again, the paragraph is a transitional paragraph
(CHAPTER-9) building “mediate” transition between the previous
paragraph and the next one, then both the beginner and the
terminator do the function of transition building—the beginner with
the previous paragraph. and the terminator with the next one. The

following picture clarifies the process.
previous
paragraph
ee
ae
=a)
see
ps eel
_——
parsgraph

Because a paragraph within an essay does such functions of
transition-building, a paragraph separated from an essay may not be
complete in itself: it may be dependent (See CHAPTER-9) on some
other paragraph for the completeness of its idea. So, in this sense.
the concept of completeness of the idea of a paragraph is relative
Confers),

All e-books & Software : www.tanbircox.blogspot.com
The Paragraph The Basi: Unit of Composition 201

The developer, as the term implies, is that part (clearly the
inikidle part) of the paragraph in which the idea introduced or
wiqnaled by the beginner is developed or supported by the
necessary facts, examples, comparisons, contrasts. definitions,
Classifications, arguments, or descriptions. It takes the readers deep
into the topic.

Traditionally, the first sentence of a paragraph is indented—
that is, it’s to be started with a gap from the margin at the left side.
The gap Is called the indent. (See the following picture.)

fe

indent

This convention is followed in the case of both an isolated
(eparate) paragraph and any paragraph in an essay. But an
indentless beginning is also possible according to a modern
alternative set-up, especially when the paragraph is used in an
essay. But such indentless sentence set-up Is not usually followed
in an isolated paragraph. However, if the indentless set-up ts
lollowed, then at least two spaces are left between two successive

paragraphs as follows (figure in the next page) : <
s
Effective Writing Skdis For Acivanced Learners
Updated Bangla e-books(pdf): www.facebook.com/tanbir.ebooks

one
paragraph

a

aa

ph

If, however, the indenting technique is used, then only one space is
enough, as in the figure shown in the next page.

We're discussing about the body of the paragraph. The
discussion has covered the anatomy of the paragraph body as well
as its physical lay-out (such as indenting). In this regard, also, it
may be worthwhile to say a word about the size or length of a
paragraph. Roughly. how many sentences or words should be
there in a “typical” ot standard paragraph? It's. indeed, a tough
question to answer. As we've already known, there may be even a
one-sentence or one-word paragraph. Such paragraphs can't be
analyzed in terms of the beginner, developer, and terminator; they
can only be evaluated (Qt =a, ov | oft S21) in terms of their
importance. In fact, such paragraphs are created only in long
essays (or novels or stories or any kind of prose) to emphasize or
focus the thought contained in them. Again, transitional
paragraphs also tend to be shorter than the average paragraph

All e-books & Software : www.tanbircox.blogspot.com
The Pareegraph: - The Basic Unit of Composition 293

indent ——?

length of an essay. So, it can at best be said that a paragraph
should be long enough to cover all necessary details for its
completeness and short (or better say “tight”) enough to avoid
irrelevant (Saris) or unnecessary ideas. The length, in other
words, is determined by the nature of the topic. Usually it varies
from three or four sentences to fourteen or fifteen. Various reliable
outhorities, however, say that an average paragraph length of
college term papers or research theses should be eighty words.
According to this “rule of thumb” (stews ors wfewer-fréy fr), it
can be advised that if the length of the average paragraph of your
report or thesis is less than eighty words, then yoii may assume
that you've not developed your idea fully, and if it exceeds that limit.
say. by twenty or thirty words. then you can try breaking the
paragraph into two. Remember, however. that such a “rule-of-
thumb” should not be applicable in the case of descriptive and
narrative paragraphs.
294 Effective Writing Skills For Advanced Leamers
Updated Bangla i ale iad ae Wal tac r.ebooks
Sow. however, well again go back to the

b devel . and i . How many words or
sériintices from the ‘bapieining make the beginner? The same
question may be asked of the terminator too. How many, then? It's
a relevant (&7f%) question but nobody can answer it in terms of
the number of words or sentences. It's a conceptual (“mmTs, SGa)
task. We can identify such parts from one another only by
thoughtful observation. Let's see some examples, then.

My Favorite Hobby

Man must have a hobby and an addiction. says a scholar. It's a fact,
indeed. Though hobby is an activity which our livelihood has
nothing to do with, we do it for the sake of pleasure. That ix,
though hobby is not for livelihood, it is for life. 1 have, for
relevant reasons, a hobby. It is photography. Every weekend I go
out of the town to take photographs of natural scenery, the
lifestyles of the innocent village people, and domestic as well as
wild animals roaming about at large in the fields and forests. This
hobby gives me not only pleasure but also knowledge. As to the
experience, it is nice. It gives me an opportunity to mect various
types of people and sce various types of places. It also gives me an
opportunity to relax in the midst of so many mundane chores. Now
Thave a huge collection of photographs on various subjects nich in
beauty and variety, | show them publicly normally two times a
year. On those occasions, | invite the honorable persons of our
locality. Their encouragement, I think, will lead me onward on the
march of life. Scholars say that those who take their work as a
hobby become successful, but I do not know what they have said
about those who have taken their hobbies as a routine job; yet I
have taken it so,

The beginner of the above paragraph is this portion - Man must
have... ..- I have, for relevant reasons, a hobby. And the
terminator is : Scholars say ...... yet I have. The portion in

bety is the developer. Again. it's easy to identify these parts by
All e-books & Software : www.tanbircox.blogspot.com

The Prrageapb «The Bersc Unit of Comperition 295

thoughtful observation. In each part, a slight turn (C878) of thought
is discernible (S]et="7),

The Educative Value of Traveling

"A gentleman should travel abroad, but live at home"—says a
renowned Scholar. What he has said is meaningful, but it is,
perhaps, also equally true that those who want to live well and
meaningfully at home should travel abroad. In fact, traveling has as
equal an educative valuc as textbooks have. Secing is learning—the
teal, pragmatic leaming. If we go out visiting people and places at
times and see for ourselves what we would otherwise read in hooks,
our learning will become more effective. What is normally written
in textbooks? Nothing but the abstraction of the reality—of what
has happened. is happening, and may happen in future. If this is
true, Bee ESE ne, pe Aer ne eer one Fe ahaa

d The uni ies, colleges, and schools of most
developed countries have already made it compulsory to travel or go
on education tours. In some advanced countries, for cxaample, there
are some subjects on which theoretical teaching is not at all given
ty students im the first year of their schooling. Such evidences, and
various other research work launched by Scholars, hold out the fact
that traveling has an immense educative value.

The three parts of the above paragraph are identified as follows.

Beginner : “A gentleman... at home"—. _ . meaningfully
at home should travel abroad. &
Terminator : Such evidences, . . . value. Ss
Ps
The Dark Side of Student Politics

No nation can form, develop, of sustain without politics. All the
civilizations that the world has ever known had politics of some
kind in their background, though, surprisingly enough, most of the
major destructions that have ever occurred, are due mainly to
296 nated Bangla e-books (SUN Ree eeK os ATE eae
politics itself, So, where to take our stand? Truth to tell. polities ts
a necessary evil, But what about the politics of the students of our
country? Nasty, one must comment. Not that student politics has
not contributed anything to our nation-building. The role of our
student politics on the Bhasha Andolon. Shadhinata Juddha and
other national movements was brilliam and praiseworthy. But what
is its role at present? In most of the cases student politics is now
creating chaos. ransom ecOnys murder, hartal, and much
disturbance in educational More sury gly. only a
handful of cvil-motived students in collaboration with outsiders are
creating all this disturbance. We can not, however. at all prise the
rale of the top political leaders. Most of the time they have a hand
in every pic. They lead students astray for their own gain. Yet.
whatever the cause. we are frightened about the outcome. We now
must say, though unwillingly, that i1 is time for us to think afresh
about our student politics. If could be prohibited. m would be
better for both students and the nation. But who will bell the car?

Beginner : No nation But what about the politics of the
students of our country?
Terminator : We now must say... _ _ bell the cat?

Air Polllution and Industrialization

Air, one of life’s essential requirements. is under threat at present.
Fresh air is essential for life, and industrialization is essential for
our living. But, unfortunately, there is occurring an increasing
collision between life and living. The necessity of life itself is
h ing it. C dictory though it may sound, it ts a fact. As
we are increasing the level of industrialization, we are increasing
mills and factories. They are producing smoke and puffing it up
into the atmosphere. Also, these factories are leaving wastages into
open places, which are producing obnoxious gases and are
envenoming the air. The consequences are very perilous + the

among of SAE spe3 iy Sling nt the airman See RSOIM a

Vise Puanageaph : The Butsic Unit of Composition 297
which the ozone layer is being d ved, the en 1
equilibrium is being disturbed, and the flora as well as the fauna are
being th d to death. Consequently, diseases of various types
are attacking the human as well as the animal world. But does it all
mean that we should curb the pace of industrialization? Not at all
There are soluti and al: i All we must do is enact
necessary rules and regulations and then abide by them to the letter
We can, for example, specify arcas for smoke-cmitting mills and
factones and leave wastages im the prescribed places, Above all, we
have to develop in ourselves enough consciousness and future:
shock.

Beginner : Air... . Contradictory as it may sound, if is a
fact.
Terminator : Nil; natural ending by completeness of thought,
A Hartal Day

A Hartal day is a peculiar day, peculiar because it is unlike any
ether normal day of the year. Normally we have sore routine work
to du every day, Some, for example, have offide, some have their
business and so on. In a word, the necessity of the day drives
people onward along their regular way. But whut happens w them
on a hartal day? Unexpected! People who live from hand te mouth
are disappointed, not knowing what to do, what tw cat, how to feed
the family. Those, on the other hand, who do good jobs at
government or multinational panics. enjoy an horized
leave at home. Some high officials, of course, have Ww bear Ue
hardship of rushing to offive very carly in the morning. agthey
have to go on foot at the risk of their prestige. sometiaies their
lives. To look at the streets, We see a peculiar scenary? Almost at
every public square and highway, supporters of the hartal gang up
and create barricad: peding the of vehicles, Often
hangs of cocktails bursting heard around, On some streets, finding
them bare, children play cricket. football, and other games. Markets
and shops are closed. To some people, the day becomes a
suffocating one. Some peuple, however, for relevant reasons,

298 Effective Writing Sails For Advanced Leomer:

femember such a day as though it were a menvorable day in their
lives!

Beginner : A Hartal day is .. . But what happens day?
Terminator =: Absent. It's 8 descriptive paragraph. Its
termination is marked by natural ending or rythmic variation,

C. The Characteristics of a Good Paragraph

A good paragraph successfully does what it intends to do. Within
an essay, its function is to develop a unit of an outline (See
CHAPTER-2 for outline). So, every sentence of the paragraph
should clearly relate to that unit, and all the sentences as a whole
should make the reader feel that the unit has been effectively
developed. A paragraph can create such impression on the reader
only when it has four basic qualities «

1. Completeness

As you've already inferred. a paragraph is complete when it
successfully does what it intended to do. So, completeness involves
successful development of the topic. Consider the following -

Happiness

(1) Children become and remain happy if they get everything they
need. (2) A man becomes happy if he becomes an actual man. (3)
A thief is happy when he is able to steal without being caught. (4)
Happiness is, obviously, relative, (5) Everyone is happy in his/her
own way, (6) We all can be happy with what we have, if we are
able to forget what we do not have,
The Paragraph. The Bass: ( nil of Composstion 299
Do you think that the above paragraph is well-developed? Let's
analyze it. The first three sentences (Children become . . . being
caught) present some facts (as the writer perceives), The fourth
isa Jusion drawn from these facts. Again in the
sixth sentence another conclusion is drawn or generalization is
made. Notice : The generalization (fers, wedge Yea) in the
fourth sentence, (Happiness is. obviously. relative.) has been
supported by some facts (presented in the first three sentences),
But the generalization in the last sentence have not been supported
by examples or details. Again, how do the two different
generalizations (conclusions) given in the 4rth (or Sth. because
they say the same thing) and the 6th sentences come side by side?
What has linked them? So. the paragraph has not been developed
well, Now read its following version.

Happiness

Children become and remian happy if they get everything they

need. A man becomes happy if he becomes an actual man. A thief

is happy when he is able to steal without being caught. Happiness

is, obviously, relative. Everyone is happy in his/her own way. Mur

what is happiness and in what docs it lie? Actually, happiness is

the satisfied state of the mind. It may or may not have relationship

with wealth or money. One is. to be truthful. happy tw the extent

that one considers oneself happy, tr is, in other words, a matter of

feeling or perception. We all can be happy with what we have, if

we are able to forget what we do not have. For happiness is the

peace of mind. =
This time its more developed. The added group of sentetices builds
a bridge between the thoughts presented in the fourth’ and the last
sentences, and, at the same time, they provideSome details in
support of the latter (last sentence).

Such incompleteness occurs mainly because of lack of idea
development. So, before you write anything, spend considerable
amount of time gathering necessary facts about the topic. The
most common devices for getting completeness in a paragraph are
Effective Writing Skilts For

300 Advanced Leanen
Updated Bangla gg om/tanbir.ebooks

So. when you revise your writing. see well whether these devices
have been efficiently used or not.

Here's another good example. Read it very carefully with o
critical mind. Only identifying vaguely (@™8=stt#) that an
incompleteness exists is not enough. You must tell why it's
incomplete

i was the month of late Autumn. A bright. calm afternoon. | was
tired of the mundane work of the day, So. | felt like (tate Bap
Coorie"!) having a care-free walk along the hank of the river Pashur.
And so I did. The walk that | took was o pleasant one. It
refreshed me. It gave me an opportunity to come in close contact
with Nature. | wished I had been able to remain in touch with that
fomantic atmosphere lifelong (TS )

The above group of sentences may read good. But let's analyze it
Look at the sentence “And so | did.” All the sentences before it
present the “occasion”, and all the sentences after it tell us about
the “benefit” that the walk gave the writer. But where's the
description of the walk? The writer has talked much about the
occasion and the feeling the walk gave. but says nothing at all
about the walk (84) itself. That's why the words can't impress the
readers. The following version removes this flaw (@18) from the
“paragraph”

It was the month of late Autumn. A bright, calm afrernoon. | was

tired of the mundane work of the day. So. | felt like having a care-

free walk along the bank of the river Pashur. And so I did. / set owt

for uy walk, About fifteen minutes were over when I reached the

All e-books & Software : www.tanbircox.blogspot.com
The Paragraph » The Betsic Cit of Compastion 301

river, The setting sun looked astant at the river and the flora. The
waters, with all the tiny lively waves, glistened like diamond. The
tree-tops were bathed with the warm shower of honeved light. The
warmth that the sun was besmearing over the earth was, for this
reason, of a romantic nature, Gentle breecve was caressing the half.
inclined heads of the purely-green paddy plants, causing them to
undulate slightly so as to form a series ef harmenions waves of
wide-spread yreen, The edorous breeze touched my heart, my
imagination. 1 wus charmed by the beauty of nature, by the way it
welcomed mic, The walk that | took was a pleasant one. It refreshed
me. It gave me am opportunity jo come in close contact with
Nature. | wished | had been able to remain in touch with that
romantic aimosphere Iifelong.

Why don't we see another example? It's also a very nice one.

When the sun, after the hardwork of the day, becomes tired and is
about to go beyond the limit of the horizon. it invites the night for
and says good-bye to the world. At this time it begins to get dark
all over the berizon. And | walk toward my bome like a bird Mying
toward its nest. I look around with the eagerness of a foreign
tourist. The evening ts calm. It has covered the carth with a
mysterious canopy of heavenly fabric. Everywhere ix Nooded under
a mystery. Abstruseness, It becomes darker and darker. and 1 start
for home

The beginning and the ending of the above “paragraph” Smack
(tire fre) of a good writing, But the idea hasn't been developed
well, Hence, it's not a complete paragraph. Look at the verb phrase
* | Jook around .. ~ The author only tells ugthat he looked
around, but says nothing about what he saw. The beginning and
the ending suggest that the author was amused (afr, facets),
tut what gave such amusement is absent to a great extent. Just go
through the following improved version and youll see why the
above paragraph {if it can be called so) is incomplete.
£ Skills For Advanced
Updated Bangla e-books(pdf): www.facebook.com/tanbir.ebooks
the sun, after hard-work of the day, becomes tired and ts_

about to go beyond the limit of the horizon, it invites the night for
and says good-bye to the world. At this time it begins to be dark
all over the horizon. And I step toward my bore like a bird fying
toward its nest. I look around with the eagerness of a foreign
tourist, How nice evervthing looks! The remnant of the last revs of
the departing sun has tinged the tender leaves of the trees alt
around. It seems that everything around has bathed in a huge sea of
blood-red vermillion. Fron: the field the cattle are returning home
splashing dust with their tails, At times their offsprings are
running, jumping, and galloping ahead of them in ecstatic
merriments. The evening is calm. It has covered the earth with a
mysterious canopy of heavenly fabric, Everywhere is flooded under
a mystery, Abstruseness, It becomes darker and darker, and I start
for home.

In this version a description, although in brief, is given of what was
seen, Now it's complete in a sense.

In conclusion, it can be said that your paragraph is not
complete unless it answers to the questions who? what? when?
where? why?—and sometimes how?—if they're relevant.

2. Unity
A paragraph develops only one topic idea, stated or implied (see
section E below). So all the sentences in it should be related
somehow or other with this topic idea. In other words. sentences
within a paragraph should be so chosen and arranged as to develop
and manifest (S41 #21) only one line of thought. If, however. one
or more words or sentences which aren't related with this line of
thought. get included in the paragraph, then the whole paragraph is
spoilt; irrelevant (Se77f*#) ideas creep in and damage the
effectiveness of the paragraph; the readers get puzzled, unable to
grasp the main point. In short, the paragraph loses its unity.
But why does such a problem arise? In most of the cases it
happens when the writer thinks in separate sentences, and not in
All e-books & Software : www.tanbircox.blogspot.com
The Paragraph The Beste Unit of Compesition 303
the whole group of sentences. Insufficient planning is the root of
this evil. Also, inability to put ideas in the right sequence adds to
this problem. And it's a matter of much practice and thinking to
overcome this problem. To enable you to have a keen insight to
look into such problems. we'll now present some examples. It's
wqgested that you carefully go through them.

A rainy day is a day during which it always or almost always rains.
To some people it seems enjoyable, while some others regard it as
a problem. This mixed reaction of people toward a rainy day
deserves a detailed description, A rainy day is full of rains.”
Sometimes rains come down torrentially (4), and sometimes
with light drops of water. Though not continuously, but the rains
come down sporadically (tt %4) all day long and confine people
ww their houses. Roads. house-roofs, fields, yards. and market places
go under water. Village-streets get muddy (#48TS). Streets of
towns, however, become washed and clean. In some places in the
towns where sewarage systems are not good, rain-water becomes a
hazard to easy transportation. Such a day, however, is enjoyable to
some people who—Ged knows why—are humorist and do not
have to be anxious (3%Y) about their livelihood, They are rich
and live a tension-free life. Some of them are so rich
that they would not need to worry about their
livelihood even if the rainy season lasted for the
whole year. They are blessed (SPPPT#ETE) indeed. The day
gives them a leisure-time to play, sing. read poetry, gossip, sleep
Splice ech thes things: Tile Gay tocemnts enjyibie fo Gees ai
do not have to go out of doors, but can remain in the home
without being affected. Finally, it can be said that a rainy ay is
both pleasing and hazardous to people. °
mS
The above paragraph could be called a moderately good one if the
bold-faced (cat S22) part were not included (S$ %2!) in it, This
bokd-faced part doesn't agree with (%™ “TE 41) the main line of
thought of the paragraph. It's irrelevant (719%), The main point
of the paragraph can be supported by any detail related with rain,
Effective Sais For

Updated Bangla e-books(pdf): www.facebook.com/tanbir.ebooks
but it doesn’t have to do an' with why some people are very
rich, actually how much money they have, or whether they're
blessed or not. Any such digression (fgfe) from the main point
“suboptimizes” (*1] #0 GE) the topic idea and is as such (4 #04)
totally undesirable. But, unfortunately, novice writers often make
this mistake.

Here's another example, This time you have to find out the
irrelevant portion (tt) by very carefully going through the
paragraph, because it has not been identified in the paragraph. Later
on, however, you have to verify your judgment in light of the

explanation given below the passage.

Our life is nothing but a small segment (0) of the cternal (375)
flow of time. That ts why we measure our life first by the length
of time that we Gover til death. So, the value of time is virtually
(37TS) the value of fife itself, Time flows on and on. It never halts
its always-busy chariot even at the King’s request. It yields (=
TET) to none. So. one who idles away time can never get it
hack. Thus a man scen to have been living a sixty-ycar life may
actually have a twenty-year life only, if he has wasted away his
lime. However. we Bangalecs are very ant to kill away our time in
idle gossipping or daydreaming. Regrettably enough, we don't even
koow that by killing time we kill nothing but ourselves. We're, m
this sense, great killers indeed! The measurable contribution of
time to our life is the achtewerent that we have by being active
and effortful during a certain period of time. If we, therefore,
continue doing our essential work without sining idle, we will be
able to make proper use of if. Thus, if we can avail ourselves of
the opportunity of cach moment by hard labor and effort, we can
enrich our life with achievements, pleasure, and knowledge. The
ultimate reward of diligence is a happy and rich life—rich with
properity, knowledge. pleasure. experience. friends, and so on. So,
we shouldn't kill away our time, especially in the student life.
All e-books & Software : www.tanbircox.blogspot.com

the Dnagnaph The Bac Cnit of Composition 305

The topic idea of the above paragraph is the value of time in
general, not how Bangalees kill time away. That's why the
sentences “However, we Bangalees are . . _ great killers indeed!”
don't fit in this paragraph, Frankly, they're irrelevant here. Il these
sentences, however, are to be used at all, another paragraph is to
be created to amplify (r=Pt irs =21) the idea. That these sentences
are irrelevant can be discovered by carefully going through the
paragraph. To “fee!” that these sentences are irrelevant, just read
the passage excluding (4 fitt) these sentences, Then you'll feel a
smooth flow of thought throughout.

By the way. such intruding sentences are called unity
destroyers or simply destroyers. So, while writing or revising
your essay, always watch out Never let destroyers destroy ("<7
*)) your essay.

3. Order

A paragraph deals with only one idea. But the idea can't be
poured (G7 GF) in the sentences all at a time from upward like any
liquid. The idea, rather, should be developed and instilled (Re Re ate
amt) into words and sentences little by little. For this reason
sentences should be arranged in a clear sequence ("7) or order in
harmony with (SP Gt*) the order of the pieces of information or
thought p d in the paragraph. There are several ways of
arranging the material in a paragraph, but some orders are more
natural—and hence more effective—than the others,

Consider the following.

sh
SS
Rs

Physical exercise means the systematic, disciplined, and purposeful
movements of various parts of the body in order to keep fit and
healthy and protect diseases. There ane various types of physical
exercise. Each type is suitable for a particular type of people
divided by age-groups and health-conditions, Some exercises can
not be taken in all seasons and by people of all ages. Some
exercises serve some specific purposes such as beauty-enhancement
of the body or a part thereof, protection of particular diseases,
EWws—20
Effective Writing Suis Foe Acivanced Learners

Updated Bangla e-books(pdf): www.facebook.com/tanbir.ebooks
keeping the body relaxed and flexible. and so on. Swimming,
walking, jogging, parading, jumping. running. riding, weight-
lifting etc. are various forms of exercises. Phyiscal exercise keeps
the blood circulation system and metabolism (fT fie) of our
body active and healthy. It helps the creation and maturation of
muscles (C) and enhancement of strength and stamina. Regular
physical exercise prevents diseases and drowsiness. Since the toking
of physical exercise ensures good health, it accordingly ensures a
‘sound mind, and thus eventually a happy life. Physical exercise has
4 commitment both to the physique and to the mind. Specially,
students should take it regularly and build their health
commensurate with their talents.

The material in the above paragraph has been presented in the
following order :

(1) Physical exercise defined

Mpcep ets

(3) Pernt wt asd oer es
on ie

If, for example, the points were arranged in this order : 4 — 3
— > 2 — 1, then also the paragraph would not read bad. In this case.
however, the writer would have to be skilled enough. But if they
were arranged in this order - 4 -» 1 —> 3 -» 2, then the paragraph
would not read good at all. In fact, the paragraph as it is reads
better than any one of such arrangements. And it's best to arrange
ideas in their “right” order just after the brainstorming phase.
Orderly movement of sentences can be ensured by arranging
them in the order of time, space, particular to general, general to
particular, cause to effect, and effect to cause. Now we'll
illustrate these points.
All e-books & Software : www.tanbircox.blogspot.com
he Prnegeaph The Hesie Unit of Composition 207

Time. A time (or chronological) order is natural in narration (see
113) below). We use this order when we narrate (41 #21) events
as they took place (¥51) in time. The events are described one alter
enother by connecting them by first, second, third, then, after
that, next, and so on (See CHAPTER 11).

Here's an illustration.

He was born in 1944. His mother died only when he was thirteen.

Then his father married a woman who did not love him at all

Consequently, he had to leave home in 1958 at the age of fourteen,

Having left home, he took a job ina grocer’s shop. As he was very

honest and reliable, the grocer married his daughter to him afier

having been pleased with his service over seven years. After the

yrocer’s death, he inherited a Large property, He was never schooted,

but he learnt to read and write from his learned wife, who loved

him very much. Unfortunately, his wife died in 1970 leaving him

no children. At this he became mentally unhealthy and, to seck

salvation (3f) of the soul and to find the peace of mind, he

engaged himself in altruistic (*72'4"°4) activities. Thus he became

very famous day by day. This great man at last died in 1994 ot the

age of fifty.
The above is a paragraph written by a student who was asked to
write a short biography (life history) of a fictitious (@1@me) great
man. His main purpose was to write a narrative paragraph (see
below), and not to impress the reader. So, we can consider the
example as such without being critical about his style, idea
development, or diction.

Notice that the student has narrated the events in their, time
order (ie, chronologically). The years pointing 16 the events are as
follows ;

Ss
°

was bom : 1944 s
mother's death = 1957

left home = 1958

married > around 1965

wife's death : 1970

death > 1994
Sai For leamen
Updated Bangla e- books(pety www. facebook.com/tanbir.ebooks
So, though his presentation {s not attractive, his narration js

orderly, It can be inferred (S43 #21) from the paragraph that he
made a time plan before writing. which helped his narration
proceed harmoniously (3973 9fer) with time.

If the student, however, instead of pevnn wth ie tens,
moved randomly q events haphazardly as they occured to
his mind, itien, the cecknrseh exnit tsa Ws coder Suppose the
student wrote the following paragraph.

He was born in 1944. He left home in 1958 because his
stepmother tortured him. Tt should be made clear at this point that
after his mother had died in 1957, his father remarned. However, he
married in 1965 the only daughter of a grocer in whose shop he had
served since he left home. The grocer, finding him honest and
reliable, married his daughter to him, But his wife died in 1970,
leaving him no children. At this he became mentally disturbed. At
last he engaged himself in altruistic activities. Having served many
people heart and soul, this great man died in 1994,

Undoubtedly, the above is not at all a good paragraph. It lacks the
time order. The readers stumble (C886 “1em) in the gaps created by
the mismanaged arrangement of the sentences. It's a mess of
sentences, not a paragraph at all. The student's version. to be
frank, was far better.

Not that you always have to narrate events in just the same
time order in which they took place. Rather, you can flash back
when needed; that is, you can tell about an event which took place
in, say, 1990 after you've told about an event thai took place in
1994. But you can do this only when the event of 1990 is
necessary to describe the event of 1994 in some way, and when
such flash back creates a literary (>1f8f87s) value whatever. The
flash back technique, as we all know, is very frequently used in
novels, films, dramas, stories, and even in narrative essays.

Space. Like time order, space order is also natural for narration.
Space order means place order. It's needed when we want to report
All e-books & Software : www.tanbircox.blogspot.com

The Ptreageaapas - Thre Betshc € nit of Comuposition 309
what we see. Presumably, anything we see. we see in a place, So,
when we deseribe things in their places, we describe them as our
eyes move from one onto the other. thus naturally following a
space order. We can, for example, move our eyes from the lett to
the right, from the front backward, from down upward, and so on
And our narration may take its course ("f8) accordingly (esprit)
This implies that in reporting things in space order we may follow
any order that suits our purpose or becomes meaningful. But what
we must be careful about is that we must not make meaningless
tepetitions. For example, it may be confusing to flit Ge og 7 cr)
haphazardly (acerrefgert) from right to left, to center, to front,
then to left again. The following will serve as a simple iMlustration,

When I woke up I found myself tightly bound to the ground. That's
why L couldn't get up and sit down. | looked ap but the bright sun
hit my eyes. Then I looked right. A gang of naughty children
stood near me with spears in their hands. They were uttering words
I couldn't understand. In front of me was splashing the sce water.
reflecting the sunshine in a dazzling (G4 STAI) manner. At my
left side I saw some old men and women, gazing auentively and
curpously at me, as though they were amused. Also at my right
side were sitting some dogs—pet dogs. | dida't know what to do,

As we can see in the above paragraph, the writer looks in the
various directions in this order ;

first up,

then right, +

then front. rs

then left. aS

then right again. ee
Why? doesn't it spoil the beauty of the paragraph? Surely it does.
The writer should have recorded, the two things that he had seen
in two successive (7% %) sentences. or in only one sentence.

However, looking right two times wouldn't be meaningless if
the paragraph were as follows -
319, Effective Wilting Sis For Advanced Loder

pdated Bangla e-books(pdf): www.facebook.com/tanbir.ebooks
When I woke up I found myself tightly bound to the ground, That's
why I coulde't get up and sit down. | looked up, but the bright sun
hit my cyes. Then | looked right. A gang of naughty children
stood peat me with spears in their hands. They were uttering words
T couldn’) understand. In front of me was splashing the sce water,
reflecting the sunshine in a dazzling manner. At my left side I saw
some old men and women, gazing (fae 4ftce eiere ers7)
altentively and curiously at me, as though (GA) they were amused
(fate). Suddenly | heard some dogs barking. The sound came
from the right side. And what did I seet The children raised
(S31) their spears (741) at me and were going to fet the dogs
loose (TCH CFT) on me. I didn't know what to do,

This time the writer didn't look right naturally; rather, his
attention was atracted to the noise Consequently, what the
writer saw the first time was different from what he saw the next
time. In such cases repition is not only valid. but required too.

P to G I. Ws a order in expository
paragraphs (see below). In this order, some particular (feo)
siatements (examples plus arguments) are made in the beginning.
Thus the thought is developed step by step and finally a generalized
statement or conclusion ts made at the end of the paragraph on the
basis of these examples or particular pieces of information. The
process can be diagrammatically shown as follows ;

statement 1
staternent-2
Staternent-3

faa

All e-books & Software : www.tanbircox.blogspot.com
aul

The Paragraph . The Aasic nit of Compostiion

Below ts presented a very simple example only to show the flow
ol logic and the nature of generalization.

(So,) man is mortal
generalization

See another simple example in the next page.
ate, Eftectwo for Advanced Leamern
ipdated Bangla e-books(pdf): www.facebook.com/tanbir.ebooks
Particular Particular Particular
statement-1 statement-2 statement: 3
That day he The other day he | | He has committed |
hurt me without robbed a man of several other
_ any provocation oo and minced
up. 50 far.
(Bat), |
i

The “particular-to-general” order has been used in the following
three paragraphs.

Student life is the seed-time of a person, That is why this life is
the life of work, of dutics and responsibilities, if the Later part of
life ts to be a life of achievement and success. But what exactly are
the duties of this life? The first and foremost duty of any student.
as everyone opines, is to study. But studying does not imply only
soins ind hing. It ily means thorough
AY iM Hts Context, se that there may be ne
idicsiralie. gap tecteecis kerning and boing able 10 sippy what hans
All e-books & Software : www.tanbircox.blogspot.com

Ihe Porvaph - The Betsy (nit of Gauposition 313
been known. A student iy a student today only becouse he has to be
a good citizen in the future. Therefore. another duty becomes
obvious —the duty of keeping himself well-informed about various
needs, resources, capabilities, and dreams of the nation as a whole.
A student has some family activities too. because the fimt held
where knowledge acquired is to be applied is the family. Among all
other duties. the paramount duty of a student should be to continue
learning things and simultaneously applying them in real-life
situations. Therefore, the main duty of a student ts to study. study,
and study and thus learn sometitnes from hooks, and sometimes
from actions

The above paragraph talks of students’ various duties step by step
Q to their imp These are particular examples of

duties, The last sentence then combines all these duties into one

sentence. This is a generalization.

What is character?—is a very old question, and yet very difficult to
answer, Normally we mcan by character a set of behavior
Ife kindness, uh and

But behavior is a set of visable activities —it may not rep a
person's truc inner being. A person may try to appear fair while be
or she is not really so. This paradoxical fact Hates us te

include another element in the definition of character, A man will
reveal bis true character when be is allowed to do whatever he
wishes. A very nch man may not be a thicl at present, but do we
know for sure that he would not steal if he were utterly poet
Likewise, a beggar who looks very gentle and soft mei a
tyrant if he were @ king. Man's true character is re eds
has ample of opportunity to do anything he wishes. =e
sure that nobody can sce what he does. then most probably he will
do what he likes by nature. The proverb rightly says © Your
character is what you do im the dark.

The paragraph begins with a question and presents specific
examples and arguments to seek possible answers to it. At last ii

4 Eftectwe Skits For Advanced
Updated Bangla e-books(pdf): www.facebook.com/tanbir.ebooks
answers the question in the last sentence, which is o generalization
and which, though not true in everybody's judgment, is true in the

writer's point of view.
The following is an even better example.

Where does a haby look the nicest? In its mother's lap, And where
do the animals look the most beautiful? Surely in the jungle. We
may encage a bird out of joy and with a view to enjoying its
beauty and song, hut after some days a will lose all its
aitractiveness. Then the bird Mying at kurge up in the sky will look
better than that encaged one, People are seldom presented with wild
flowers by their beloveds. Why’! Perhaps they do not consider wild
Nowers beautiful when they are brought home. But it & surposing
to see how cagerly people look at them in the wilderpess. This ts
because wild flowers are beautiful where they bloom, A beautiful
woman will not look beautiful in the dirty boisterous factory. but
in the Nower garden she will. Similarly, a young stout-bodied man
will not look mice when he ts working in the kitchen. After all,
evervthing has its awn place,

General to Particular. This order is the most popular order for
expository paragraphs. It's the reverse ("%8TS) of the previous one
In this order the general statement is made first and then details or
examples are provided to support the generalization or conclusion.
The process can be shown as follows -

generalization

All e-books & Software : www.tanbircox.blogspot.com
the Aaraggraph The Basic t nit of Composition 315

Here's a short essay—not a paragraph—in which this approach
has been used,

Haste makes waste, as 1 have experienced in my life. Many
examples can be gathered in support of this statement,

t remember once mecting a man who was bundling up hes
accessories in a hotel room. He was trying ty work ser swiftly that
he seemed to be in a hurry, When asked why he was being so busy,
he said that he must catch the train which would leave afler one
hour. “Why so hurry? You've ample of time.” T assured him, But
he would not listen to me, Then | told him, “O.K. make haste
slowly.” Yet he was being busier and busier.

While bundling his articles, he broke some glass wares. As
soon as he started moving, he remembered his towel and brush
being lett out, Then he took them bat could not keep them in the
briefcase because he could not remember where he had kept the key.
‘Then, after much searching and rummaging. he found the key under
the pillow. Then again he was about (y set off when be reached for
the train ticket, but it was not there "My ticket! My ticket!” be
muttered to himself worriedly. At last be found it in his purse.
Then he set off

After half an bour he came back, panting and sweating from
head to foot. "What's wrong again?” | asked him. He said that be
had missed the train. Had he sot made haste, be would not have
missed the train. Now he suffered much a waste of time and
money.

The very first sentence of this essay makes a generalization to
Press ebach the Teter portion of & provides ary exemple. As
Now a paragraph. &
s
All that glitters is not gold. If we don't use our objective judgment,
our eyes may fail to see the actual worth of something. For
example, often we come accross commodities in the market which
look good but give little utility. Most eve-cathing, brightly colored
furniture is made of unscasoned cheap wood, The artificial diamond
6 Effective Ski For Advanced Learnen
Updated Bangla e-books(pdf): www.facebook.com/tanbir.ebooks
dacvies the eye with its fake brigh’ Even this is true
of people too, The hey who looks oversmart is virtually good for
nothing. Enticingly-dressed-up girls seldom behave well.
Everywhere we see things in pretentious disgaise. Who knows
what ts genuine and what ts enat7?

Now another short essay As you'll see. the first two
sentences (adding up to a single paragraph) express the conclusion
(generalization) which the writer proves by a fictitious (=1ef=)
example

The customer is always night. they say. And it is true as a day.

Suppose you arc a manufacturer of some consumer goods. You
have marketed a fine of cosmetic products but they do not sell
good. You then ask your engineers to check the quality of the
products. They are quality products—your engineers assure you.
But why do they not sell'—you ask to yourself. Then your
marketing manager advises you to launch a market survey to
identify what the customers really want. And a was done, The
findings of the survey informed you that the customers want
varunon in color oder, size. and price. But if you want to lower
the price, you can not maintain the quality. So, you at last decided
fot to bring about that change. since you are obsessed with quality.
Instead, you spent alot more in advertising Yet the sales did not
0 higher,

“We're here to produce what the customers want us to produce.
and net what we want to,” said your research manager. “Our goal is
to make the customer satisfied and thus make profits.” he added.
You argued with yourself a lot and at last accepted the customers’
opinion.

Much to your surprise, you found that the goods were selling
good, though the quality was poor now, So what? You got what
you wanted—the profits!

Now think, who is night—you or the customer?

All e-books & Software : www.tanbircox.blogspot.com
The Denagraph «The Baie 1 nit of Composition

37

This general to particular order has some variations. of course

Sometimes. as we've seen in the chapter
"UNFORGETTABLE ENDING.” the order may be as follows

particular
statements

titled

The following is an example. In it the last sentence in essence

tepeats the beginning—though in different words.

Uf one develops a will-power te do something, one will be able to
do it someday or other, Maybe at present a man does not know
how to do something. but eventually he will come up with a way
to do it. In fact. imention to do something is the binh place of an
actian, Nobody knows anything by magic They must undergo a
tnal-and-crrot process to find oat an effective way to du something.
Perseverence is always rewarded, Actions never fail, what fails is
only inactive dream. Robert bruce, for example, having failed
several times to defeat his enemics, was at last able 10 win over
them by tough perseverence. Sir Isaak Newton recovered by hand
labor the data he lost when his pet dog Tom set the records on fire.
History abounds in cxamples showing great men's success after
repeated trial, In our daily life too we see that, however hand a thigg
is, we can do it if we just keep on trying. Indeed, where there isa

will there is a wey, ays.

id ‘Sri vahakions Soe hall'6t tha parkigiaeh dasdogs one

phase (*%m) of the idea. and the second hall qualifies (limits or
restricts to some extent) what has been said. The two phases are
usually connected by a transitional connective such as but, still,
yet, on the other hand, or nevertheless, The two phases can be

schematically shown as follows -
18 Effectwe Learns
Updated Bangla e-books(pdf): usa) aie sea r.ebooks

eet

f

We've an example below.

generalization
another phase) 9 <———"

It is not filly true that hooks do make us good. True, books
always give us pleasure—pleasure of knowledge, pleasure of truth,
pleasure of imagination, and, even, pleasure of provocation. Much
of such pleasure has good sides, no doubt. But pleasure, being 4
completely subjective feeling, may not always be good. There are
humerous evidences that books, especially those which are written
only to carn money capitalizing on their instantancously
provocating quality—provocation of both sexual and criminal
nature, have done great harm to various societies of the world. Su,
books are sometimes harmful to the reader as well as to the
society,

In such cases, however, the last generalization may not always be
present.
All e-books & Software : www.tanbircox.blogspot.com
The Prnagrapat The Basie Crit of Counpesition 319
Notice the organization of the idea stated in the first sentence,

which is the topic sentence here. The topic sentence can be divided
into two parts :

Books sometimes make us good.
Books sometimes make us bad.

The first part has been supported in the first phase of. the
paragraph, and the second part in the second phase, And the two
phases of the paragraph are. you've already seen, “separated” by
the connective but.

One question may arise in this regard ; Couldn't the two
phases be sep d as two paragraphs? The answer is no, because
the topic sentence itself suggests the two phases. And everything
that the topic idea contains must be embodied in one paragraph. If,
on the other hand, the topic sentence was. say, Books can make
us good, then there would be no such second phase. It's because
the topic idea (Books can make us good) doesn’t allow such
phasing, In that case if the idea of the second phase were to be
expressed, then another new paragraph would have to be
developed. Let's work this principle af paragraphing on the above
paragraph by changing the topic sentence.

Books can do us good. Books always give us pleasure—pleasure of
knowledge, pleasure of truth. pleasure of imagination, and pleasure
of provocation, even, Much of such pleasure has good sides.
Consequently. the fecling and experience of such pleasure can mage
us good. &
But pleasure itself, being a completely subjectiy@ feeling.
may not always be good. There are numerous evideneSs that books.
especially those which are written only to cam money capitalizing
oo their instantancously provocating quality—provocation of both
sexual and crimminal nature, have done great harm to various
societies of the world. So, books are sometimes harmful woo.
329, Wilting Skits For Advanced Leamers
ipdated Bangla e-books(pdf): www.facebook.com/tanbir.ebooks
Obviously. the two paragraphs have two different topic sentences

the topic sentence of the first paragraph is its first sentence, and
that of the second paragraph is its last sentence. They could never
be unified in a single paragraph without modifying the topic
sentences.

Here we can remember one basic characteristic of a good
paragraph ; completeness. When, during revision, you need to split
(break) one paragraph into two or more, you'll do well to reconsider
the completeness of the new paragraphs. Splitting only ensures
unity. but it may damage the completeness. The above two newly
formed paragraphs, for this reason. lacks completeness. though
their unity is very strong.

Cause to Effect. This order is very rarely used. But it can safely
be used where necessary. Cases are found where one or more
causes bring about (¥>r#) an effect CF"), and then that effect, alone
or together with other causes, becomes a cause of another effect
which in turn ("@) may cause (42% VTE) another effect. If you write
on scientific or philosophical subjects. you may have to write such
“cause and effect” paragraphs. In these cases remember the above
cause-effect chain. Take care that you don't state one of the
causes first, then the result, and then, seeing that you forgot to
mention other causes, those causes. Always maintain the real
sequence (#3). If, however, the issue under discussion involves a
simple cause-effect relationship where some causes are responsible
for an effect or some effects, then simply wnte the causes first, and
then the effect or effects.

So. the reality may demand that you plan your material as
follows :

a couse — 1
effect — 1 : (becomes) cause — 2
4
effect — 2 : (becomes) cause — 3
tL

effect — 3
All e-books & Software : www.tanbircox.blogspot.com
The Peragnaph - The Base ( it of Composition 321

Or,
b. cause —1 case—2 cane—3

SS
ea

The reality may, however, involve much more intricacy (wires),
So, before you write, Come concephen lope Gama, We, fe
above ones and try to understand the issue. &

Here are two plain examples. Ss

~

2. I did not do my homework. As a result the instructot gave me an

F grade. Consequently, I failed. Then, instead of trying for the

second time to pass the exam, | gave up studies and took this job

here. Again, because | am not a university graduate, I do not
deserve any promotion. That is why you are my boss, though once
you were my classmate.

uws—21
effect relationships in the reality may
bed REY Relig ROSS) Oba VARENG® OOH MAGIA BIE Cake
in which a cause brings about an effect which again strengthens
the cause itself. The following sentence contains such a vicious
circle :

Habitual drunkards lack will power; that is why they are habitual
drunkards.

So. you must remember that the more complex the issue, the
more complex the pattern of your sentences to represent it. And
it’s only a thorough analysis of the issue which can help you write
better in such cases.

4 ¥
Effect to Cause. This is—as you can easily understand—the
reverse of the preceding order. It can also be as complicate as that
one. In fact, the same set of cause-effect relationships can be
narrated in both the order. So, which order you should follow is o
matter of choice. The effect-to-cause order, however, is seen to be
more frequently used a it enables better and easier reading.

One variation of this order is a question to answer order, in
which the cause is exp d as a question and the effect is given
as the answer to that question. In such cases the question itself
implies (74 347%) the topic klea, which is why the topic sentence
implied when this order is used_

Here we conclude the discussion on order by saying some
relevant words. The concept of order ts not limited to the
composition of paragraphs only. It's also equally applicable to
essays and any other piece of writing, stories included. Again, you
must be careful enough to adopt orders for the paragraphs of an
essay 50 that they best fit the overall (mf%*) order of the essay
And it’s also required that you begin vour writing plan (CHAPTER

the essay.

r

1 1
www. facebook.com/tanbir.ebooks

All e-books & Software : www.tanbircox.blogspot.com
The Panagnaph - The Basic Unit of Composition 323

4. Coherence

The last characteristic of a ph asain is coherence,
Though in the sequence of our discussion it comes in the last place,
it's no Jess important than any of the other three characteristics—
completeness. unity. or order. It refers to the smooth and
consistent flow of thought from the beginning of the paragraph
through the end. But how can such smooth flow of thought be
ensured? There are several ways including the proper development
of idea and some sentence linking devices. Coherence is, in fact,
hot limited to paragraphs, rather, it’s required in the whole essay,
How an idea flows inside a paragraph is as important as how it ts
linked with other topic ideas cantained in other related paragraphs.
So, almost essentially, this concept deserves more special and more
detailed discussion. For this reason a full chapter has been dedicated
to the discussion of this concept in this book. Read CHAPTER 9.

Coherence is closely related with order and unity. If there's a
strong unity and 4 reasonable order of idea presentation,
coherence is bettered and strong in the paragraph. Not only that,
only playing with linkers (CHAPTER 11) at the sentence level will
do little 1 the paragraph lacks unity and has a poor order,

D. Types of Paragraphs

We've already known that a paragraph deals with a specific (AFR)
topic idea. But the nature of the topic idea may be of warious types.
For example, a certain paragraph may lyze an issue with
examples, facts, ideas; it may simply describe what has been seen;
it may tell the reader about how some events took place (N91). In a
word, specific topic ideas take specific forms (sf, ation) of
expression. Thus the different forms of expression cregte different
types of paragraphs. Paragraphs, from this point. of vow. can be
Wentified as of three main types =

Expository paragraph,

Descriptive paragraph, and 2

Narrative paragraph. &
Now we'll discuss about them. .

37h dated B | books(pat) orem bir.ebook:
pdated Bangla e-books(pdf): www.facebook.com/tanbir.ebooks
Expository Paragraph
Most of the essays that you are asked to write in colleges.
including reports or term papers. answers to questions and
explanatory answers, and on other competitive exams, consist of
expository paragraphs. Even most of the essays you write for
magazines and all types of research articles more or less include
paragraphs of this type. So, you need to give special emphasis on
the kearning of it, expecially if you're a student. In this regard. you
need to know :
@ what type of topic demands an expository paragraph:
@ how expository paragraphs are developed
@ how within-paragraph and inter-paragraph transitions are
built when all the paragraphs in the essay are expository in
nature; and
@ how unity and completeness are ensured in, and a good
order selected for, expository paragraphs.

The third point has been discussed and analyzed in CHAPTER
9). The fourth point has already been discussed in this chapter. and
the first and the second points will be elaborated in this chapter.
However, to begin with, we should define and know the
characteristics of the expository paragraph.

Any paregraph in which some facts are presented, ideas and
beliefs are evaluated and combined, or any kind of argument is made
is called an expository paragraph. Functionally, it analyzes,
explains, illustrates, compares, defines, evaluates, arques. More
specifically, it answers questions like What? Why? How?—tike
What is its cause? What is its result? It has a clearer beginning and
an ending than has any other type of paragraph,

Carefully notice that a paragraph written on any of the
following topics will be an expository paragraph -

@ Happiness @ The value of time @ The educative value of
traveling @ The dark side of student politics @ Air polution and
industrialization @ Bad habits @ The danger of smoking @

All e-books & Software : www.tanbircox.blogspot.com

The Petrargraph > The Bande Unit of Composition 325
Socialism @ Democracy @ Necessity of learning English @ An ideal
leader/teacher @ Mass media @ Honesty @ Patriotism @ War and
peace @ Modesty @ P. ¢ @ Punctuality @ Computer @
Newspaper reading @ My favorite author @ Social change @ The
potential of the human brain. @ Price rise. @ Drug addiction @
Star-war @ Altruism @ The effect of the sattelywte TV on our
youngsters @ Violence on the campus @ Vocational training @
Motivation @ Character @ Fraternity @ Women in Bangladesh @
The value of time @ Discipline @ The ballot is stronger than the
bullet @ The more man gets. the more he wants @ Money is a
good servant, but a bad master @ Might is right @ Empty vessels
sound much @ Every thing has its own place @ Haste makes waste
@ A friend in need is a friend indeed. All that glitters is not gold @
Power corrupts @ The pen is mightier than the sword @ As you
sow, so shall you reap @ The customer ts always right etc.

Remember that the answer to the question which asks you to
give your opinion or show arguments will be an expository
paragraph if it's written in one paragraph. So, you should apply the
techniques of writing an expository paragraph in writing the
answers to relevant (2777) questions on your exam, If you're a
high official or business executive, then also. you may need to write
many expository paragraphs every day, The techniques of writing
this type of paragraph, therefore, is very useful.

2. Descriptve Paragraph

Unlike expository paragraphs, descriptive paragraphs do not
compare, contrast, analyze. evaluate etc. Descriptive paragraphs.
on the other hand. inform the readers by telling them the writer's
sensory perception—that is, what the writer sees. _feels, or
imagines. But description does not tell the readers what the writer
knows or believes. as exposition does. Descript joneovers a wide
range of perceptions like sight (7%), smell, taste’ feeling, sound.
That's why this type of paragraphs is freq ly found in stories,
novels, autobiographies, scientific reports reporting observations,
essays telling about the writer's experience of something. and so
on, Notice that if you write a paragraph on any of the following
topics, then it will be a description :

926 Effective Wilting Skis For Advanced Leamern
Updated Bangla e-books(pdf): www.facebook.com/tanbir.ebooks

e@MmMy @ Trafic jam @ A hartal day @ A walk in the
country @.A city market @ Today's stock market. @ The college
magazine @ When the evening comes @ A sunset scene @ Rice @
dute @ A rainy day @ The trade union @ Tea @ A village fair @ A
moonlit night @ The girl I saw the other day @ Her eyes @ Five
blind Indians saw an elephant @ The night before an exam ete.

To be able to write such paragraphs successfully, you need to
know. various words—especially verbs,,adjectives. and nouns—
which are used to describe various aspects (FF) of your perception
(23%). We'll refer to such words in the paragraph development
section.

Description is of two types ; subjective description. and objective
description. In the former, writers describe the reality as they
perceive (S784 #21) it, and, in the latter, they describe the reality as
it ts. Consequently. two subjective descriptions of the same thing
by two writers will be different, but two objective descriptions will
not,

3. Narrative Paragraph

A narrative paragraph (or piece of writing) records some events
(83-7) in 2 meaningful sequence. Anything that takes place (=reBe
&%) over a period becomes a narrative when written. For this
reason, a paragraph (or essay) written on “The natural scenery of
this village” will be a descriptive, while (8*5) one written on “The
change of the natural scenery of this village over the past fifty
years” will be a narrative with descriptive mixed, Likewise, stories,
novels, autobiographies. history—these are narratives. Again, if
you write a paragraph on, for example, any of the following, then it
will be a narrative ;

@ My childhood @ A ble day in my life @ How man
reached the moon @ Qur Liberation War @ The death of a man
etc.

You may be somewhat confused about whether a certain topic,
idea should be elaborated as a descriptive or narrative. So, let's
compare these two.

Suppose you write a paragraph or an essay on “A Rainy day”
Since you look at the day as a whole picture, and not in sequential

All e-books & Software : www.tanbircox.blogspot.com

The Paragraph The Basie Unit of Composition 327
(eres) events, you're more likely to throw light on its various
effects according to their importance or sccording to your
subjective (own) arrangement The result will be a description. If
you. on the other hand. write on” How | spent @ rainy day,” then
most probably youll begin considering the whole day from the
morning through the evening. That ix. you might start the essay
with, say, “The sound of torrential rains woke meup early inithat
moming ..” and proceed with the events or things you did one
alter another till the evening. This, then. would be @ narrative. In
fact. this wouki be a narrative supported by description at various
phases. Let's see the following example.

Human memory is very shorn. Every day nurmenous incidents hit on
it to get ao place, but few sustain. Thousands of events and
interactions come im contact with our memory every day. but of
them only-a selected few endure (Fe €"). And all through our
life we thus continue to collect innumerable records in our
memory. But truth to tell, only a few appeal to us the most. Now |
would like to tell you about a day of my life which ts associated
with such an outstanding event.

1 was only nine then. I went to my aunts home with my
fother to spend the summar vacation there, My mother did not go
with us. My aunt's home was about cight miles away from ours.
On that southern region of the Khulna district in those days, there
were only two means of easy Communication—taunch or boat, We
got on the launch around four o'clock in the afiernoon and reached
there around seven. But as soon as T stepped on the premises of ray
aunt's house. Thad an alicn feeling: everybody seemed 10. Ke 100
peculiar and undesirable ws me. Though they received Lathe? and me
cordially. they seemed to have treated me wiemewht jenlifleretly
knew nobody, It was the first time | visited their home. Berides,
never in my life had I lived a single day without my mother.
Therefore. just then | was missing her the most. And after some
time I grew $0 desperate that I made up my mind to Mee stealthity
from there and return home to my mother And sot uid
328 Effective Writing Skits For Acivonced Learner
«Updated Bangla e-books(pdf): www.facebook.com/anbir.ebooks

It was about 8 p.m. when I ran away, But how Ww return now?
There was no launch or boat at night. So | had to start walking. 1
did not know what way to walk fo return to oar village. [| was
scared. But suddenly an idea came to my mind : there is a big road
along the bank of the nver through which we came here by the
launch; | might well follow that way. So I staned walking as fast
as I could along that rad. On my way home, | met many people
returning home frum the nearby village market. Their unattended
presence saved me from getting frightened. But as ill luck would
have it, soon the road was lonely. A weird silence occupied
everywhere, Time und again gusts of wind flew above the wide
endless ficld creating an unfamiliar whistling sound. At times
small whirl-winds splashed the water in the fiver at my right side.
It seemed that | was awaiting some undesired event. And this kept
me in such a suspense that at times | was startled by triffling
sounds floating around me. All of a sudden Ef stumbled on a beap of
mud. The whole inner self shook in me. | was paralized with fear,
expecting some huge-bodied ghost standing before me. I hardly
dared to lift my head up. But after a while, feeling nothing around,
I got up on my fect and resumed my walk.

Tan not clearly remember bow I crossed the open field and got
to the nearest locality. Perhaps | was in a paroxysm of some
strange feeling that was cating into my nervous system. But as far
ws I can remember, | always thought about my mother.

As 1 was walking along the boulvard of the locality. 1 found it
more difficult to advance as fast as I did before. there being very
scanty moon-light. The road-sides were crowded with hedges and
trees of various sorts, which seemed a frightening reservoir of
uncanny darkness, Night-birds and wild animals were rustling in
the bushes, and hot-headed dogs were barking at unidentified
sounds, Their sudden harsh barks caused quakes in my timid heart.
Many a thorn and sharp-cdged thing got stuck into the Mesh of my
leg. But there was no time to pay attention to it. I did not even
have the mood to scrutinize whether there was bleeding in the legs
or not. At last I arrived, God knows how, at the “kheyaghat". Now

All e-books & Software : www.tanbircox.blogspot.com
fhe Peerangrapes - The Basic Unit of Compesition 320
1 was happy as a lark. Only to cross the river, and I go to my
mother! Ab! I'm successful at last! But alas! How could f cress the
river? No boat was seen in the river, | was anxious, Wi all my
attempts end in smoke at last. then? 1 sat down on the grass.
looking far in the river. To my great surprise, | saw a fishermen’s
hoxit sailing toward the cast, they would pass by me, and | would
request them to do me a small favor, They helped me after much
hesitation, Thanks to them, anyway.

Having crossed the river, as | was walking along the well-
known road of my own village. | seemed to have been flying into
the air as lightly as a lonely cloud. Now my heart was totally
disburdened, heartbeats better than normal. “I'll give mother a
surprise.” I thought. | was trying to reproduce in my mind the
adventurous story that | had just created so that I could tell her
everything with great confidence. As | was walking thinking and
planning this, all of a sudden a dried branch of a large banyan tree
fell with a deafenmg bang on the ground in front of me. I felt as
though Thad heen thundered. I started my walk again,

At last | reached home, trembling. 1 was wet from excessive
sweating from head to foot, A senior servant of our home opened
the door. He was taken completely aback at my arrival. “Mother!” |
called gaily. but that old servant promptly said, “When you had
gone away with your father, your mother became restless for you.
She started weeping. She was missing you. And at last...” "At
lust? What happened?" | asked him in one breath. To that he
replied, ~At last she started for your aunt's home with your elder
brother.” st

wo)

W's not easy to say for sure whether the above Sssay is a
narrative or descriptive. It is. in fact. 2 narrative Supported by
descriptive. The real begins with the setond paragraph -

“ht was about 8 p.m. when | ran away.” The plot or structure of the

story Is arranged in a time order (discussed earlier in this chapter),

which has a beginning and an ending and which develops step by
step as time passes by, In it the events (5?) are recorded as they

Effective Writng SiR. For Advanced
Updated Bangla e-books(pdf): www.facebook.com/tanbir.ebooks
place (51) in. reali is a narrative. Also, there's a little

deseription skilfully designed to help the narration.

But consider this example

Last night my heart was as light as the air, because the S. S.C
examination was aver the day before. | thought that | would have a
care-free sound sleep. But when. sitting on the roof of our howse. 1
saw the silver moon nsing up slowly, blinking ike a fluorescent
heavenly stone, | could hardly think of going to bed without
enjoying the night. Psat down unmoving Gradually the huge sky
mysteriously burst out ina soundless loughter of @ shower of
heatless Hiyht, Pieces of tonety clouds responded to the toucting
stimulus. The moon-light fell on the earth steatthily like an
incessant shower of rain, Trees of far-off places and the roofs of
funses became whitewashed with light: minarets of the nearby
mosques wlazed, What a sight! It seemed te me that an unbodied
heavenly girl desdended on carh, with refreshing «beep in one hand,
and a mothcy of dreams in the other. There was hardly any sound
nearby, except fie one of two signal-shouts of the seniry-min. [ sat
unmoving. looking agape at nothing specifically, but only having
a bird's eye view on everything arvund with a view to discerning an
Unexpressable beauty, | forgot about the bygone hours, about the
morning that followed. Were Ta poet, | could picture the beauty of
the night to some extent. Bot my words are domestic and

a ¢ are trite | only could enjoy the
parissip Sa Peuisaes triad valance
and sometimes by drinking the nectar that the huge cup of the
hight offered me < all these 1 did in my imagination. When the
night's face became pale. | looked at the watch and saw that it was
Sam. For fear of the chasing sun. the heavenly maiden ascended
up to the heavens and disappeared. Then IT moved to my room,
fubbing my cyes and bearing the weight of imagination in the
head.

—by S. M. Zakir Hussain,
A Passage i the English Language
All e-books & Software : www.tanbircox.blogspot.com
fie Paragraph The Borde Unit of Composition 331

This is not @ story. It's a description of some perception—ol what
the writer exw, how he felt, Such perception took place in a time
frame. but the time doesn't have any role ($f) in it, Again. there's
ho series or sequence of events: what there ts in the paragraph is a
series of sensory experiences or perceptions. This is a desctiptive
paragraph.

Here's yet another example—a descriptive.

Normally. 1 do not become much astonished or thrilled for
anything when 1 get up from bed. of get tickled by any
extraordinary emotinal appeal. Because, as soon as 1 nise-up, [lose
my dreams; even the remotest feeling of dreams wither away for the
presence of too much consciousness. But as soon ax | woke up the
other morning. f was startled. What an extraordinary feeling’
Though I woke up, my dreams. as it were, were not gone. Variius
birds were chittering all around. doves were cooing. cuckoos calling
from amidst undetectably covered branches of trees. New leaves
were Visible on branches of frees which had withered away during
the winter. There was a smell of warmth in the air, Something
seemed to have touched my heart, my dreams. my imagination, |
breathed out spontancously:

9, whut ts ~

ibe bliss

That I have aba. yet seems (0 be

Sitnple as a breath and casy as a smile.

And older than the earth.

Even after my awakening. | seemed to have entered inti
another dreamy realm of wakeful The 4 were im
bloom, The southern wind with its touching varents cee Tayiitle
over the garden on the other side. The inertia duc to the lor fasted
winter were gone, It was pothing but the spring, | ery easily
understand, e

In such a moming there should be no repentaiice even if one
happens to wake up earlice by mistake. Sleep can easily be
sacrificed to enjoy such a beautiful morning. The much-familiar
environment around looked new, Whichever dircetion [ looked, it
seetied 10 me that some hidden initiatives were being taken by
someone stealthily to bring about a drastic change in Nature. The

Etfective ‘Skis For Advanced Leaner
Updated Bangla e- books(pdf): www. facebook. com/tanbir. ebooks
sky was bathed with Li was

visible on new green leaves. Thowshads.of Sowers adorned the
morning all around, A mysterious reddish layer encirled the
horizon. The sky held up an upturned image of itself on the
transparent water of the nearby lake. Domestic animals were
wearing a mask of mundane smile over their faces. Everything
satisfied the eye.

All of a sudden I caught sight of several girls un the roof of a
neighbor of ours. They wore yellow sarces, some golden Mowers
woven to their hair. Several yellow birds few over their beads,
calling loudly—4ee tee tee,

©, was that all a sight. or just a feeling’ was that any reality.
or just an accidental extrovert reflecuien of my own imagination?

Slowly walked 1 down, like a bewitched soul, on my
hypnotized legs. | took my stand in my garden. So much sound!
Such a wonderful combination of sounds of »o many tones! That
very morming was. as it were, a pocm—a full-fledged poem
reflecting all the tenderest emotions of the inner self, The mind was
perhaps awaiting something thrilling. Parhaps it took much delight
in being startled, Suddenly there came into my hearing some
sound—coo-ku.ku. 1 was startled really’ Because I had been
awaiting this very event during the Last part of the year.

Kt came into my sight that many other big and small birds
were singing to greet the spring morning; with that melodious
sound were mixing the rythmic beats of the coconut leaves that
were blithely quivering in the air. 1 realized the truth that
spontaneity has a specific rythm and rhyme of its own, and that
natural emotion has a normal playful pace. though i behaves like a
wayward butterfly fying in a not-so-sirong whirlwind. 1 realized
that it was a pleasure to sing out in unison with nature's concert, I
was beyond myself with an eestatic feeling.

1 was only moving my cyes around. spell-bound. New sight
adorned the environment all around. There was a jovial vivacity in
the eves. | saw that innumerable bees were sharing amorous hugs
with thousands of wild flowers. Will they only gather honey today?
No, Perhaps some purposeless merry-making tickled them much
during that golden morning.

All e-books & Software : www.tanbircox.blogspot.com

the Paragraph» The Basic | nit of Composition 333

All of a sudden it occured to me that Thad my slipper on. | put
them off. As soon as | put my bare feet on the bedewed grass, it
seemed to me as if the spring had touched me. There was
something human in that touch. That grass also had emotion! |
walked on it slowly. Why was the dew-drops touching me like
that? Never before had | felt such an intimate touch of Nature. I
could feel that everything could be felt from within and from
without.

— by S. Mo Zakir Hussain,
Selected Exsays
Notice in the above essay how the writer describes his feeling.
weing, and imagination.
The following example—if only this portion is considered—
jeems to be basically a descriptive, though it's set in a time frame :
from 8 a.m. to 9 a.m.

We got on the train at 8 a.m. The train cried a peculiar whistle and
Started moving like a huge titan, puffing out smoke. | had the
opportunity to sit by a window, As the train started moving, | all
of a sudden was plunged into a huge sense of pleasure. seeing the
huts, trees, and shops running backward, and fecling an cestasy of
dynamicity.

It was an express train. So it halted nowhere on the way. The
sounds of its wheels were hitting on the way-side trees and hedges
and huts, and reflecting back as though they were incessant heart
beating sounds of the metallic titan. First bothered, and then
enchanted by the incessant harmonious sounds, my younger brother
and sister dived into deep sleep. But 1 kept on looking at sights of
near and distant places, spell-bound by their novelty —

From the train 't enjoyed evanescent stench soon
could see the scenery of the left side only, We crossed huge fields
looking solitary with no crops. We hastily passed andering
<atals, sonorous bazars, and green orchards, So many sights seen at
one continuous look seemed to be a panorama of half-real pictures
ts the dream.

Many stories and novels. though they are narratives as a
whole, contain many descriptive and expository paragraphs. Yet. in
a4 Effective Sei For Advanced Leorent
Updated Bangla e-books(pdf): www.facebook.com/tanbir.ebooks
many cases, calling them narratives is enough to identify them as
they are. Nevertheless, sometimes we may have to use compound
terms like narrative-descriptive. or descriptive-narrative, oF
narrative-expository to identify some essays. But as far as a single
paragraph is concemed, such terms need not be coined (ef #31) as
it tends to be purely narrative or purely descriptive or purely
expository.
E. Topic Sentence And The Paragraph

We've already seen in other related chapters that in a pagagraph
there must be only one topic idea which, when expressed in only
one sentence, Is called the topic sentence. Though the topic idea by
a must for paragraphs, the topic sentence is not. That is, there
may be a stated (™8, #87) or an implied (33) topic sentence. In
most descriptive paragraphs, it's implied. The description itse!l
shows what's being described. Again. narratives may or may not
have sith topic sentences. But In most of the expository
paragraphs (or essays) written by students, there are clearly stated
topic sentences. Such a topic sentence, if any, may be placed in the
beginning or ending or anywhere. However, in paragraphs (or
essays) written in. the ‘particular to general order (See above). it
appears in the ending, while in those written in the ‘general to
particular’ order, i appears in the beginning. The latter order being
followed by mast students in their academic reports, the topic
sentence appears in the beginning in such cases. Both orders,
however, tend to be equally frequently used in articles written for
magazines,

Not that in expository paragraphs the topic sentence can not
be kept implied. It can. Here's an example.

Where does a baby look the nicest? In its mother's lap. And where

do the animals look the most beautiful? Surely im the jungle. We

may encage a hird out of joy and with a view to enjoying its

beauty and song, but after some days it will lose all its

attractiveness. Then the turd fying at large up in the sky will look

better than that encaged one. People are seldom presented with wild

All e-books & Software : www.tanbircox.blogspot.com
Ve Pareynaph The Bessie (nut of Composition 35
flowers by their belaveds. Why? Perhaps they do not consider wild
Nowers beautiful when they are brought home. Bat it i surprising
to see how eagerly people look at them in the wilderness. This is
because wild Mowers are beautiful in where they bloom, A
beautiful woman will not fook beautiful in the dirty boisterous
factory, but in the Mower garden she will Similarly, a young
stout-bodied man will net look nice when he is working im the
kitchen, What does it all imply, then?

This paragraph has no topic sentence. but it can be inferred (314
#21) that the topic idea is » Everything has its own place. And this
would be the topic sentence if it were stated in the paragraph. Truly
speaking. in this case, the patagraph would be more beautiful and
easier if this topic sentence were added to it at the ending. Here's
another example.

1 remember once meeting a man who was bundling up his
aecessories ina hotel room. He was trying to work so swiftly that
be seemed to be in a hurry. When asked why he was being so busy,
be said that he must catch the train which would leave after one
hour, "Why so hurry? You've ample of time,” | assured him, But
he would pot [Mento me. Then 1 told him, “O.K, make haste
slowly ~ Yet he was bemg busier and busier. While bundling his
articles, he broke some glass wares. As soon as he sturted moving,
he remembered his towel and brush being Jeft out. Then he towk
them but could net keep them in the bnefcase because he could not
remember where he had kept the key. Then, after much searching
and rummaging, he found the key under the pillow, Then againstie
was about to set off when he reached for the train ticket, buts was
mot there, "My ticket! My ticket!” he muttered 46° himself
-worriedly. Arlast he found it in his purse. ‘Then he set'off:

After half an hour he came back, panting and sweating from
head to foot. “What's wrong again?” Pasked him. He said that be
had missed the train. Had he not made hayte, he would not have
missed the train. Now he suffered much a waste of time and
Effective Writing Siiis For Advanced
Updated Bangla e-books(pdf): www.facebook.com/tanbir.ebooks
topic idea of this paragraph can be easily understood from
penultimate sentence (the sentence prior to/before the last). The
topic sentence would be » Haste makes waste.

That there can be a stated topic sentence in a descriptive
paragraph can also be exemplified. The topic sentence of the
following paragraph ts implied.

When the tired sun ts about to skip the wall of the horizon at the
end of the day, it leaves the last touch of its warmth and blush
scattered in the west sky. The tiny waves of the river water
playfully reflect the fading nays like diamond. Nature pauses for a
while 10 watch the beauty of the universe, the last smile of the day.
Everywhere is sorrounded by the calm of rest and leisure. Tree tops
glow feverishly; patches of lonely cloud wink. From the south
blows soft pacifying gentle breeze. The sun, blinking several times
looking at the earth, says goodbye tw ber. Down comes the
evening, but the remnant of the Muorescent twilight glares in the
mind's eye of the beholder,

But the following sentence could be added to it at the very
beginning keeping the unity of the paragraph intact (Fs) «

A sunset scene, though not an unsusnal phenomenon (867) in owr

everday experience, com become a unique source of enjovment to a

Awmorist heart.

In that case this sentence would be the topic sentence Read the
above paragraph again placing the above sentence at the beginning,
and you'll understand it.

In fact, most of the topic ideas of descriptive and narrative
paragraphs are plain facts or perceptions; they need little special
effort to be understood. That's why a discussion of the topic
sentence in that regard is not very important. On the other hand,
because expository paragraphs make the reader think and argue
with himself or herself, topic sentences are an important factor to
them. Consequently, you have to think in advance about whethey
any topic sentence is to be stated in the paragraph at all, and about
where it should be placed, if used. In deciding about this point, a
selection of a suitable order in advance should be very helpful.

All e-books & Software : www.tanbircox.blogspot.com
The Paragraph: The Baste (nit of Compenition 337
Il. PARAGRAPH DEVELOPMENT METHODS

How should the topic idea be developed into o complete paragraph?
You already know the answer from the chapter titled “IDEA
DEVELOPMENT AND THOUGHT PLANNING.” The techniques
discussed in that chapter are equally applicable both to paragraphs
and to essays Essentially. in both the cases. the brainstorming
technique should be used to generate primary ideas and to ascertain
(a 221) what information is needed. After this ts done, we can
proceed toward the next steps. But we can be more specific in
Per tenant dh eee a ee
(te) what type of paragraph (eg. exp o
narrative} is going to be written. That's hier) we ned further
discussion in this chapter on idea development.

It's better to develop a paragraph in a way that best suits its
type, because each type of paragraph virtually needs a different
treatment. Here are some tactics for developing each type of
paragraph, To. develop expository paragraphs, the following
tools are used :

Definition,

Enumeration,
Comparison and contrast.
Cause and effect,
Classification, and
Mlustration.

To develop descriptive and narrative paragraphs, we use the
techniques of description and narration. respectively. &

Definition Ko

This is perhaps the most widely used technique’ h in defining
expository paragraphs (or essays). Simply put, to.define means to
limit or set boundaries.

You must have observed the use of definition in many articles
or books. Often, before defining the concept or the real “thing”,
writers define the word or the term used to refer to that thing. In
such cases they use the dictionary definition or etymology of the
EWS—22
E ‘Skis For Advonced Learnen
Updated Bangla e-books(pdf): www.facebook.com/tanbir.ebooks
word or term. phase ( of the definition over,
approach the definition of the “thing” and link the two definitions
The definition at the word level is called nominal definition and that
of the real thing |s called rea! definition. The real definition can
again be subjective or objective. That is, you may define something
in your own way from your own point of view or you may accept
the traditional or any other scientific definition. But before defining
anything, make sure that you really need to define something al
the "word level”. If you don't need it actually, better avoid it.

It has already been said in the above paragraph that you may
decide how you want to define something. In fact, you choose a
definition according to your purpose. If you define something
according to how people commonly define it, then you're said to
use a consensual definition. If you, for your own purpose, add some
special meaning to the consensual definition, then your own

is called stipufative definition. If, again, you say what a
word ought to mean by differentiating it from what it really ts
eres Seer etre. then you're snid to use & legislative
definition. Notice, b bets a stupulative
definition and a legislative erin A writer uses the former
(=re%) only for his or her own practical convenience (41), The
definition may begin like this : “For convenience | will use this term
to mean .. .~ But the latter is what the writer accepts as true or
valid.

As we can define something by saying what it is, so we can
define it by saying what it is not. This technique is called negative
definition, which ts sometimes needed when a positive definition
(such as concensual, stupulative. or legislative) is hard to establish
or when the positive definition alone may not be sufficient for an
understanding of the thing.

Things can be defined in several ways ;

— by simply pointing to them in the reality:

— by describing their characteristics;

— by comparing them with other similar things;

— by contrasting them with things opposite to them in nature,

by

All e-books & Software : www.tanbircox.blogspot.com
Nive Parrargrnp ) The Bese Unit of Compasition 339
Now let's see some examples. Consider the following one first.

What is character?—is a very old question, and yet very difficult te
answer. Normally, we mean by character a set of behavior
fepresenting truthfulness, kindness, considerateness. and innocence.
But behavior is a set of visible activilics—i may not represent a
person's truc inner being. A person may try te appear fair while he
or she is not really so. This paradosical fact necessitates us to
include another clement in the definition of character, A man will
reveal his true character when he is allowed to do whatever he
wishes. A very nich man may not be a thief at present, but do we
Know for sure that he would not steal if he were utterly poor’?
Likewise, a beggar who looks very gentle and soft might be a
tyrant if he were a king. Man's true character ts revealed when he
has ample of opportunity to do anything he wishes. Or, if a man is
sure that nobody can sce what he does. then most probably he will
do what he likes by nature. The proverh rightly says : Your
character is what you dio in the dark.

The above paragraph has been developed by definition. It first
presents 3 consensual definition (second sentence), But later on it
modifies that definition by a legislative one (last sentence). But it
doesn't abruptly (5 #2) leap (FPF GAT) from the first to the second;
rather, it supports the latter (*tz2fSr#) by some illustrations
examples). The conceptual structure can be shown as follows.

| Normaby, it means . (consensual) .
OF
&
But nis not Ss
sulficient. example. ~O"
reality shows that examples

| So asreally.- —egidatve)
Effective Writing Seis For Advanced Leamen
Updated Bangla e- books(pdf): www. facebook. com/tanbir. ebooks
The y uses the
legislative definition supporting it by (desired) characteristics of the
subject (ideal teacher). Notice the use of . _. “. _. must know .
“must be an. 7. gpd beak <1 8 etc Nircheesthiedulieliion
by a remarkable epigram (CHAPTER 11).

The teal of a thing is offen a theoretical concept, and rare in
reality. Yet we must pursue it to advance toward more and more
perfection. In this sense, everything has an ideal at its top. And so
a teacherstup. An ideal teacher is one who is not only

Jedgeable, sincere, farsighted, and self-taught, but also very
dest ip sindictds. He euais sions te to deacon the ensues hide
inside the students and help to develop it, In giving the teaching,
he must be an actor and an innovator. He must have penctrating
insight and i knowledge of education psychology. He
should be wise enough to teach students how they can teach
themselves. He must, frankly speaking, know well what he knows
and what he does not know, Unlike other ordinary teachers, he
should train up his students so that they no longer have to depend
‘on teachers. Finally, an ideal teacher is one who makes himself
unncecssury to his pupals.

The following example is worth considering. It begins with a
nominal (dictionary) definition, which can also be called a
synonymous definition (definition given by a synonym (aes re -
as “unselfishness” for altruism). Then it attempts to define the
subject (altruism) by directly pointing to the reality, Then again, it
attempts to clarify the concept by citing (3I@¥ #1) concrete
examples from history.

The dictionary definition of altruism is unselfishness—caring for
others’ good before one’s own. And a person with altruism ts an
altruist. It is a sad reality that altruistic persons are very rare on
earth. Most of the people we interact with in our daily round are
selfish and greedy, But majority does not always count. Good ts
| And the really good are never vilified by the bad; on

All e-books & Software : www.tanbircox.blogspot.com

= F

The Paragraph » The Rasy (nit of Composition 341

the contrary, they tend to be better, And that is why. hopefully,
there are still altruistic people in the world. Whatever they do, they
do for the well-being of other. Histery proudly holds up the
biographies of such people. They are really very strange human
beings. Mundane happiness hardly ever attiracts—or better say
attucks—them, yet they even lay down their lives for other people's
mundane as well as spiritual well-being. They think for people;
they dream for people: they work for peuple. Surprisingly enough,
they do not expect any return. The altruism of, for example, Hazrat
Muhammad (Sm), Jesus Christ. Mother Teresa. Florence
Nightingle, Karl Marx, Lenin, Newton and such other people is
unbelievable. The purport of their teachings is : To be happy in
life, become a good spouse; to be influential in social life, be a
good neighbor or leader; but fo be a real human being, be an
altruist. Becasue “We mast love one another or die.”

The following is an excerpt (¥3f%#) of a paragraph at the
beginning. As you can see, it starts with a real definition.

Drug-addication is the taking of various drugs illegally and being
addicted to it for their toxic and addictive effects.

The following paragraph defines “comp in the foll
steps » by giving its literal (=T**) meaning: shart Gy Gall ashok
it meant fundamentally; then by telling us what it means in the
modern times.

bigizankesumn doors cacet caplgrencnben
computes or does various calculations. Fund: yet is
calculating machine. It can perform various calculations like
addition. subtraction, division, multiplication and sqaia

Understandably, a thing can be defined in a number of ways.
The definition will take a form according to how the writer looks at
it or how the writer wants to present it to meet the desired
purpose. So. it's advised that before writing the paragraph. you
Me, tec ‘Sits For Actvanced Learner:
pdated Bangla e-books(pdf): www.facebook. eamtenihs ebooks

ide in advance (in writing or on your mental screen) how you
want to define it.

Enumeration

This is basically a device (CT) for arranging other paragraph
developing devices such as illustration, cause and result, comparison
and contrast, and classification. When more than one example are
given or comparisons are made, etc., then this technique ts used to
make a list of them. Such listing (or enumeration) can be open or
closed. When a definite number is declared (such as - There are
four causes of . . .), then the list is made by linking each item to
another with first (or firstly), second (or secondly), third (or
thirdly) and so on, connecting the final one with lastly or finally
or with, say, the fifth and the final cause is. . . This can be called
closed or definite tion. When, h . it's not possible
for relevant reasons to definitely declare how many items will come
next or how many factors are there in reality, then they are
declared indefinitely (such as : There are several causes of | . .).
Under such an indefinite or open declaration the items then come
one after another as linked by One is .. ., The other is. . ., Yet
another is. . . etc, These linkers are called enumeratives or
enumerative adjuncts, a working list of which you will find in
SEArTES 11. prumermting es, wt. cam. be. caller: pan.-o7
. However, you may have found such
sikcricts to: bic bled. a noughs dls, book:ta dewioning vadious
Paragraphs or sections. Also. these adjuncts have been referred to
in CHAPTER 9. as they help build transition from one sentence or
paragraph to another. You can never avoid them, but if you want
to create a style of your own, you may invent newer ways of
listing, Instead of plainly using ordinals such as first(ly),
second(ly), third{ly) ete, or cardinals such as one, two, three etc.
But in doing so, don't forget the necessity of concision (atf*¢eT)
and plainness (#81).

All e-books & Software : www.tanbircox.blogspot.com

The Punngeaph » The Basic Unit of Compenition 343
Comparison And Contrast

These are frequently-used devices to develop expository
paragraphs. Sometimes the topic idea itself implies (8% J™) the
necessity of these devices: sometimes theyre deliberately used to
create a definition (as you've seen in a previous discussion}

When two things are compared or contrasted, theyre naturally
placed side by side. In such ases, the comparison of contrast is
easy indeed. Some schemes are often used including the following.

common or
subject similar characteristics subject

First a comparison.

| memory |
(fan) sola
= +
_ % . ¢
“a ite , &
memory =e

Human brain eee te Cee in three ways, (Or, Human
brain and the computer are fcomparable in three ways.)
One, cach has a memory. Two, cach can perform calculations. And
three, the working memory of each is limited,

£

Effective Writing Suits F

344 Learners
Updated Bangla e-books(pdf);, www. facebook. aaasbobs. ebooks

Now a contrast.

A acm RE

bes endless
Cra <4} permanent - Computer
ee al memory

ee

There are three main differences between the human brain and the
computer. One, the human brat has imaginative power, but the
computer has not. Two, while the human brain has an endless
permanent memory, that of the computer is limited by bits. Three,
since the human memory is part of a living being, it bas
developmem, while the computer memory can not develop by
itself, it being part of an inanimate object

* development

The human memory is different from the computer in three main
ways/aspects. As to the human memory. it can imagine, has an
endless permanent memory, and has development. On the other
hand, the computer can not imagine, has but a limited permanent
memory, and can not develop by itself,

Unlike the human memory which can imagine, has an endless
permanent memory, and has uni 1 develop the comy
has no ability (o imagine, is linuted by the permancat memory,
and locks development.

The similarities or differences, however. could be worded (#f=

WS MS) in several other ways. But two main schemes are
followed. One starts with one of the subjects A or B, each followed

by

the set of common or differentiating
All e-books & Software - www. tanbircox. blogspot com
The Pemagnaph » The Bust 1 nil of Composition 345

tal

This scheme has been followed in the above examples. But another
scheme is possible in which the two subjects are differentiated or
likened with reference to (#98) each differentiating (mfsTes) or
common/similar characteristic -

Following this latter scheme, the above difference could be‘Shown
as follows - ra
~
Thete are thirce vida lA GF SitNerenick Devi hanna
and the computer. One is imagination. The human brain can
imagine, while the computer can not. Another (point of difference)
is permanent memory, The human memory is endowed with an
endless permanent memory, but the computer's permanent memory
js limited. The third main point of difference (between the human
a
EMective Sidit For Acivanced Leamers
Updated Bangla e-books(pdf): www. facebook.com/tanbir.ebooks
brain and the computer) is development. Human brain develops till

death. The computer can not develop at all by itsell,

Bear in mind. again, that the same paragraph could be written
in several other ways with slight changes in sentence arrangement
and choice of enumeratives, bringing about no change in the given
scheme or structure.

Now consider the very beautiful paragraph quoted below. It first
makes a generalization (Take care! each of you is a governor, and
each of you shall be asked concerning his subjects :). The
generalization establishes a similarity between each person and a
governor. Then each pair of clauses clarifies the similarity.

Take care! cach of you is a governor, and each of your shall be
asked concerning (tet, T¢) his subjects (28) ; a leader is
governor over (his) people, and he shall be asked concerning his
subjects: and a man is governor over the people of his house, and
he shall be asked concerning his subjects; and a woman is
governess over the house of her husband, and over his children, and
she shall be asked concerning them; and the slave of a man is
governor over the substance of his master, and he shall be asked
conceming it. Take care, then. cach of you is a governor, and cach
of you shall be asked concerning his subjects.

— Hazrat Muhanimad (Sim.)

The circular ending (the beginning is repeated in the ending), the
parallel sentences. the plain illustration of the similarity, and the
orderly presentation of the examples—these all have made the
paragraph (a two e paragraph!) p ive. The
organization best suits the Prophet's purpose.

Now see how a far-fetched comparison has been presented in a
very lively way in the following paragraph.

When a sin ts committed in the land, and he who is present at it is

averse (face) to it, he shall be as who is absent therefrom: and he
All e-books & Software : www.tanbircox.blogspot.com

The Paragraph The Butsic Unit of Composition 3A7
who is absent therefrom, but is pleased with tt. shall be as be who
is present at it.
— Prophet Muhammad (Sm)

Sometimes. especially in the case of contrast, there may be a
“chain relationship”, as in :

To be alone is better than to have a bad companion, and a good
companion is better than being alone: and dictating the good is
better than keeping silence; and silence ts better thin dictating evil

— Prophet Muhammad (Simn,)

The above “implied” contrast can be shown diagrammatically as
follows -

dictating evil

The two-phased contrast can be further anatomized in the
following manner for a better understanding -
“4s itectve Sais For Advanced Leamen
Updated Bangla e-books(pdf): www.facebook.com/tanbir.ebooks
{better than)

(better than)

So. before putting down such complicated chain and circular
contrasts, it's good to draw conceptual diagrams like the above.

Cause And Effect

In expository writings you may have to deal with causes and
their effects. These are frequent in research reports, magazine
articles and other essays. When such causes and effects exist, it's
best to enlist (fetes #2) them first and find out their
relationships. Then it's to be decided how they've to be arranged
In the discussion of order we've seen how they can be arranged.
So, read that discussion again.

All e-books & Software : www.tanbircox.blogspot.com
The Paragraph The Basic Unit of Composition 349
Cissification
Classification is a difficult task, especially when you have to
“went” it. To do this you must undergo a rigorous process of
analysis and evaluation. Various ways are there to introduce
classification. Some are as follows -

“—— falls inte four categories.

“— can be divided into six classes.

“—— may be classified as follows.

“—— are generally categorized as the following four types
“—— are put into different groups.

"—— consists of three sub-groups.
“——" has three steps.

"—— can be grouped into A, B. and C.

After such sentences are used enumeratives to link one class with
the other. In this case you should decide in advance whether you
should use the open or the close enumeration technique.

Illustration

Illustrations or examples are used to support a conclusion {or
generalization). Often illustrations follow a generalization and try to
prove it;'Welve seen many example: of how to’ use examples in
writing throughout this book. Examples are d by a
sentence, a phrase. or a word.

A sentence :

Let us take an example. ot
Let us consider an example.
Here is an example. eS
The following is a good example.
The following will serve as an example.
Examples abound in support of this statement.
Let us consider three.
An example (illustration) is -

.. like this/the following -

A is
Sie Bangla e-books(pdf): www.facebook.com/tanbir.ebooks
example

for instance

as a case in point
such as

asin.

A word :

say
suppose
thus
consider
take

“For example” can be used in different positions of the
sentence. Read the following examples

Laughter can cure many diseases. For example, when you are
mentally depressed, laughter can cheer you up.
Laughter can cure many diseases: When you are, for

example. mentally depressed, laughter can cheer you up.

When the sentence fs relatively short, “for example” can be
used at the end of the sentence like this -
. for example.

“Say” sc aie "kia yebium Gcpiaice tw Wik eens
separated from the other part of the sentence by a comma on
either side.

Consider a situation, You have bought a shirt for, say, Taka 500.

On coming back home, you find five hundred taka in its pocket

In this regard remember one thing - Do not use the same word
or expression always. Vary their use.

Description And Narration

Description is an art, so to say. To be able to describe
something well, you must have a good knowledge of words that

All e-books & Software : www.tanbircox.blogspot.com
Me Paragraph The Baste Url of Compesition 351

help to describe. You should know words to describe what you feel,
what you hear, what you see, what you imagine. You can see, for
«example, various shapes. colors, relationships or interconnections.
and so on. Your language should be strong enough and your
vocabulary enriched enough to describe these things. You have
also to make sure that you can describe sounds in their proper
tone, pitch, and mood. Most of the time verbs are used to describe
them lively. Likewise, your language should be enriched enough to
enable you to describe activities, qualities, quantities and so on.
Since description involves the discussion of vocabulary to a great
extent, it will be cumbersome for us to discuss it here. So, it's
elaborately discussed in the book "Writers’ Grammar."

Here's a list, though not necessarily complete in any sense. of
those types of words which are most often required to describe the
teality—what we see. feel, taste, smell, imagine and so on. You'll do
well if you can gather as many words as you can under the head of
each of the following words Make a list of them. Learn them well.
Then use your list as a reference when you write descriptive
essays. Youll, however, find a good working list of such words
with their Bangla equivalents or definitions in my book Writer’
Grammar,

shape arrangement

number look (Car)

quantity existence

motion course

direction fight .
color quarrel Ra
physical characteristics profession &
time affection oe
order position
relation tools

fruits geographical terms

fishes behavior

birds gesture

animals posture
Effective Writing Sets For Advanced Leaner
“Updated Bangla e-books(pdf): www.facebook.com/tanbir.ebooks
human body

paris of in
parts of plants haughtiness (8®&7)
sound movement
temperament taste
size odor
utterance abodes
feeling status
garments/dresses furniture
mode of action fixture
collective nouns
or class names

names and parts of various everyday-use things and so on.

Narration also involves description to a great extent. Besides, it
involves time order. The best way to learn to narrate attractively ix
to analyze good pieces of writing by famous writers and to

The final word about paragraphs. Don't forget to brainstorm
ideas belore writing any paragraph, especially if you're a novice
writer. Also, don't consider a paragraph in isolation (fafaqystra);
rather, consider it as part of a whole essay. The next chapter will
illustrate how each paragraph should be connected with another to
develop the whole essay.

All e-books & Software : www.tanbircox.blogspot.com
THE ESSAY

Mother
Son
Mother
Son

Mother

Son

: What are you doing, son?

: Writing an essay.

: Good. Read it to me.

: But Ive not yet learned to read

it well. You know, Mom, it's
easy to write but difficult to
read

iT tien witha Gaonnsathinigt Wiiieh ta

easy to read.

: But that's difficult to write.

— a joke by the author
¥,

Updated Bang eee ADTE BeHOcoy/tanbir.ebooks

A. The Beginning And The Ending
B. Writing Plan Revisited

ae
wow. faceboor.com/tanbir.eboo

All e-books & Software : www.tanbircox.blogspot.com

G
A. The Beginning And The Ending

In CHAPTERS 3 and 4, respectively, we've seen how the
beginning of an essay can be made attractive, and the ending
unforgettable. So, in this chapter we'll not discuss those
techniques. Here well confine our brief discussion to how we
should plan the beginning in light of the purpose and topic and how
we should choose an ending in light of the beginning and other
factors. Though you made a writing plan in the idea development
phase (1%), in which you planned a beginning and an ending
without knowing the true nature of them, now, after you've read
this chapter as well as CHAPTERS 3 and 4 you'll have to
modify the two parts (le, beginning and ending) in that plan.

In fact, you can't begin an essay without knowing where you'll
end. So these two parts are interrelated ("a> TTS), and as
such they should be planned simultaneously (<8 77m). At least,
once you've selected a beginning, write it on a piece of paper.
Below it write the outline and try to ‘write’ from the beginning all
the paragraphs in your thought. After you've briefly thought about
the content of each paragraph till the end, you know fairly well
how your thought will flow from the beginning you've chosen
through the end. Then think out an ending which will better fit
both the beginning and the purpose.

Diagrammatically we can show the relationships of the
beginning and the ending with their determinants as follows, (See
fiqure in the next page.)

The diagram shows that the topic and the purpeie can
influence one another. The purpose determines the.style (See
CHAPTER 12). The topic, the purpose, and the .fyle—they all
determine the beginning. And the ending is a‘product of the
influence of mainly these three factors—the beginning, the style,
and the purpose.

The style influences both the beginning and the ending
because once a certain style {eg. formal, informal, colloquial/
conversational) has been chosen, the whole essay must be written
Effective Writing Skills For Advanced Learners
Updated Bangla e-books(pdf): www.facebook.com/tanbir.ebooks

in that style. The nature of the topic influences the beginning
because the beginning must agree with the complexity, importance,
and familiarity. If, for example, the topic is highly technical and
important. then special efforts may not be needed to make the
beginning amusing or attractive. Such a beginning can assume the
form of a definition or an introduction. Likewise, if the purpose is
simply to inform (like that of a research article), such a beginning
suits it. li, however, the purpose is to entertain (faire =z) or
persuade, then such a ‘patterned’ and over-used beginning won't
attract or amuse the readers. So it's apparent that the beginning is
also influenced by the type of reader (here, of course, the TOPIC is
enough to imply this relationship). Most of all, what directly
determines the ending is the beginning. Hence, when you're about
to write the ending, never forget to consider the beginning over
and over again, ey Sie celica ama
one after another in the following manner to make
+ - All e-books & Software : www.tanbircox.blogspot.com
? Ending

Even after all the discussiom of this chapter and of the
CHAPTERS 3 and 4, you may be asking a very basic question ; But
how can | know that a p Jar type of beg! gq will sult my
essay most? The answer will, in effect, come to you from yourself.
The more you think about the beginning In terms of its relationship
with the purpose, the topic, and then the style, the clearer the
issue will seem to you. Here, of course, some techniques have
heen given for your convenience in thinking,

You can implictly or explicitly announce the subject (topic) or
the purpose. [subject—beginning relationship or purpose—
beginning relationship). The following are some examples.

Announcing the subject Explicitly (Directly) :

In this article /essay we'll consider. _ .

This is a story about . . .

What is luck? It is. . .

Marketing is a battle with perception, and not with the
competitors, I'll try to prove my claim in the followig sections,
Perhaps all of us have heard of a ghost (8%) without a head,
but how many of us have heard of @ man without a chead?
&
s
S

PFynr

o

RS
Eftectwe Ski For Advanced Learnen
Updated Bangla e-books(pdf): www.facebook.com/tanbir.ebooks
‘Perhaps none. But [ve known such a man. And here's a true
story about him. (Later on you may make clear that you
meant a “lool” by the phrase “a man without a head").
6. We're poor because we're lazy, and not because we don't have
wealth. Let's see this fact.

Implicitly (Indirectly) :

7. What has made us so poor? Lack of wealth? No. To be
frank, are we active and industrious enough? No. So, the
answer lies here. Let's see how.

8. Marketing is unquestionably a battle. But it’s not a battle
with competitors, That's the traditional view. Modern
research has shown the reality to be otherwise. It's a
spychological battle.

Announcing the purpose Explicitly :
9. The purpose of this essay/story is to hurt/
amuse/shock/surprise you.

10. It ts my purpose to consider... . . .
11. [would like to have a talk with you about. . .

implicitly :

12, Let's laugh a little. (an indirect way of informing the reader
about the purpose).

13. You don’t believe God? Nor did |, earlier. But now I do; not
because I've seen Him, but because I've NOT seen Him
even I've got two keen eyes. Let me share with you my
experience, then.

(Actually, your purpose is to persuade the reader to
believe God. But you're not telling him or her your purpose
directly),

The explicit methods don't seem to attract the reader much.
Again, they've been overused over the past centuries. That's why
many conscious writers now-a-days avold such beginnings. Yet

All e-books & Software : www.tanbircox.blogspot.com
The Exar 359

such beginnings can be. and still are, used in highly technical
informative writings. which need not be made attractive as the
readers need to read them. In fact, when writers—especially novice
writers—can find no other interesting way to begin their essays,
they use this explicit announcement technique. This doesn't mean
that you should avoid it; rather, you can effectively use it by
modifying it in light of the techniques presented in CHAPTER
3

The announcement—explicit or implicit—may again be
i diate or delayed. Among the foregoing examples, the
examples numbered 7, 8, and 13 have used the delayed technique. In
this technique the subject or purpose is expressed not directly in
the beginning. but after a few words or Such opent
(beginnings) are arranged in such a way that the readers feel
interested after reading the first few words; and they feel more
interested when they read the announcement. So, such
announcement should never be much too delayed, lest the readers’
interest {ade away (38 WH, cs m7).

B. Writing Plan Revisited

You can make your writing plan you prepared in CHAPTER-2
more usable and more friendly than the outline. The outline virtually
provides you with the “local theme” (the topic of the paragraph) of
each paragraph and shows how they spread from one “universal
theme” (the topic of the whole essay). But it doesn't tell you how
you can express those topics In words and sentences. A specific
local theme can be expressed in words In many ways. Mittually,
each time you change your tone (For discussion on‘tone, see
CHAPTER 12), you have to change your words also? The result?
Each time you come up with a different pereosioh though the
theme is the same. So, if you write an essay (or even a paragraph)
three times from the same outline. you'll eventually write three
different essays {or paragraphs) because perhaps you were in three
different moods in those times. But if you plan your essay in a more
elaborate way (as we'll shortly see), there's much likelihood thaf
Effective Writing Skills For Advanced Leomen
Updated Bangla e-books(pdf): www.facebook.com/tanbir.ebooks
you'll write almost the same thing each time you rewrite it. If any

plan can ensure such consistency, then, beyond doubt, it's a
standard method. Now let's see the steps of that method.

@ From the outline (writing plan) method, determine the
number of paragraphs to be developed in the essay. Then. on a
separate sheet of paper. draw the same number of boxes in o
manner shown by the figure in the next page. (Here it’s assumed
that the number of paragraphs in the essay is seven).

@ In the next step, write in the first and the last boxes the
beginning and the ending {if you havent developed them fully, write
them partially) paragraphs, respectively.

@ Then, by the help of the outline, write down the first
sentence and/or the last sentence of each paragraph in the other
empty boxes, In doing so, keep in mind your inter-paragraph tran
transition plan (See CHAPTER 9) so that you come up with the
right sentences ensuring the desired type of thought-flow
(transition) from each paragraph into the one that comes next.

@ |f you want to maintain any transitional paragraph
(mediate transition; CHAPTER 9), leave the corresponding box
empty and write the notation TP (Tansitional Paragraph) beside {t
Write this paragraph {and fill in the box) only alter you've prepared
the other boxes. Write the transitional paragraph in light of the
knowledge you've acquired in CHAPTERS 9 and 14. If your essay
ts long enough and has more than one part, you may use more
than one such paragraph.

@ Then go through this whole “simulation plan” (the plan
that's almost similar to the actual output/éssay) and think over it
again and again. Put down each item of the outline beside its
corresponding box, At this phase, while going through the
“simulation boxes,” if one or more sentences come to your mind
which seem to be interesting to you but which you've not recorded
earlier. write such sentences in the relevant boxes.

All e-books & Software : www.tanbircox.blogspot.com
@ If your essay ts long enough to be divided into several parts,
or if you're writing a report or a book consisting of several
chapters, then make one such “simulation plan” for each part or
chapter separately. In doing so, make sure that you maintain the
required transition between those parts or chapters.
Witifing S@s For Advanced Leaner
Updated Bangla e-books(pdf): www.facebook.com/tanbir.ebooks
@ To ensure better transition, indicate with arrow marks (—)

which paragraph is linked with which one. The topmost paragraphs
trom which idea flows into one or more other paragraphs are here
termed the “head paragraphs”, while those into which the idea
flows from these “head paragraphs” are termed “subordinate
paragraphs”. Agoin, the paragraphs which are equal in rank with
each other (because they're immediately subordinate to the same
head paragraph) are termed “coordinate paragraphs.” Paragraphs,
by the way, which are directly linked with the “universal theme” or
topic {of the essay/repart: titke/ subject of the book) are coordinate
to one another and subordinate to the theme of topic. Now, again,
whichever transition technique or techniques you use, make sure
that the appropriate transition is maintained between two or more
coordinate paragraphs and that thoughts flow from the head
paragraph into other subordinate paragraphs in a consistent
manner. Of course, you can avoid such arrow marking by labeling
each box with the number given in the outline. You can easily
determine the status (subordinate or coordinate) of the paragrapt
by the babel ( eg, A, B, 1,2, a, b, e (1), (2) ete).

The arrow-marking may look like the following [figure in the
next page). In the simulation diagram, the paragraphs 1, 5, and 8
are coordinate to one another and subordinate to the topic.
Paragraphs 2 and 3 are coordinate to each other but subordinate to
paragraph 1, Likewise, paragraphs 6 and 7 are coordinate to each
other but subordinate to paragraph 5. Notice that the transitional
paragraph (paragraph 4) links paragraph 1 with paragraph 5. So, it's
the same in rank with paragraphs 1 and 5, and as such it's
coordinate to them. There was no point in your outline for
such a paragraph. (So. when you count the number of
paragraphs from the outline, add to the total the number of
transitional paragraphs you want to introduce). Also notice that
paragraphs 2 and 3 have no direct relationship with paragraphs 6
and 7. But they're of the same rank and hence coordinate to one
another

All e-books & Software : www.tanbircox.blogspot.com
id TOPIC
1
a _—
eS
_ ;
re
=
3
Jace
ke :
Pe
Pal
ae:
==
Beir 7
Conclusion 8 ; gs
&

The above diagram, hhoweder,.shients-siviety senile ‘teendiaton
plan. It may be much, much more complex (See CHAPTER- 9).

Now let's take an example to see more elaborately bow the
above “simulation plan” can be used for excellent results. Let's take
a very short example—a student essay.
Outline
Updated F "lel Spb? Welagebgiccomtenti r.ebooks
2. But don't worship it.
3. A comparison between those who live to ear
money and those who earn money to live
4. Conclusion

No, of paragraphs—4
plus one transitional paragraph
Total No. of paragraphs : 5

Money ts the second God—goes
Money buys | the saying. In a sense, that is true,

+
True, money is very powerful, But + —
what is the nature of its power?
Being a part and parcel of daily le, | TP) 2
does it deserve the honor we give it? = -—

As a matter of fact, money isa good /¢~
But don't
hin servant but a bad master . . -

ao

All e-books & Software : www.tanbircox.blogspot.com
. we earn money to live,
alaieinchtetambmeny:
comparison 4
: Those who. . ve
So, money can never be our
Conclusion God—even the second ... 5

The student put this plan before him and wrote the essay, Here's
the essay (it has been a litth: modified).

Money is a Good Servant, but a Bad Master

Money is the second God— goes the saying. In ao
sense, that is true. The wheel of the whole universe of
activities centers around one point—money. Money buys wealth,
happiness, even love sometimes. Mankind all over the world
kneels down to tt. Truly speaking. there is hardly any job on carth
that money can not accomplish.

True, money is very powerful. Bot what is the
nature of its power? Being a part and parcel of our
daily life, does it deserve the honor we give it?

As a matter of fact, money is a good servant but a
bad master. [i serves you best—with anything, in any way. But
if you worship it, it conquers you wholly. Then you cease to be
yourself, Not only that, you can not be a good servant its well <5

In this regard, one thing we must remember ; weStarn
money to live, and we do not five to earnsioney,
Those who carn money to live carn it and spend a? and enjoy
their lives, They change money into happiness, prosperity,
development, and well-being; but moncy can not change them.
They can enjoy the gifts of life. But, on the other hand, those who:
live to carn moncy live like slaves to it. It is those people who are
the root of all evils—chaos, destruction, murder, robbery. bribery
and so on. Not only they can not control themselves, but they are
fective Writing Skills For Advanced Leamors
Updated Bangla e-books(pdf): www.facebook.com/tanbir.ebooks
controlled by money, We must run after money, bul must not run
toward hell.
So, money can never be our God—even the second;
for “You must have one God only, Who will be at the expense of
two?"

All the paragraphs of the above essay are coordinate to one
another. Now see another example.

Topic . Power Corrupts
Outline - 1. Definition and introduction
2. Power and the holder
3. Power and corruption
3.1— Why does power corrupt
3.2— Power corrupts the powerless
4. Power is a necessary evil

Clearly, points 3.1 and 3.2 are subordinate to point 3 but
coordinate to each other. The ideas developed by brainstorming are
not shown here, but the simulation plan is shown by the See figure
in the next page. s
The student then wrote the essay with the help of this
plan. He was asked to write it briefly. Here's the essay
“Power is difficult to define but easy to identify.”
When we see something done or some achievement,
we can easily infer that there was some power behind
it. In simple terms we can say that power is the ability to do
something or make others do something. This implics that no
great deed can be done without power, but unfortunately, the
reverse is also true that all the harms and destructions done to the
world are due mainly to power, That is, power has some bad sides
too,
Power doesn't exist without a person or system.
So, it is best to analyze it in terms of its relation
with its holder. When, for example, a person is in power he or
she can not but use it, That person may be just or unjust or
selfish, and the exercise of power by him or her will go
accordingly. Most of all, power tends to instigate and intoxicate the
ill-wills of a person, Most of the time the power-holder becomes
selfish and dominating. Virtually, even the closest friend, when in
power, looks down upan a person as his or her enemy. "A friend in
power is a friend lost” is a truism.
All e-books & Software : www.tanbircox.blogspot.com
meet

367
Power Corrupts
Outline
“Power is difficult to define but easy 10
identify ~ When ae seer done del end
or some achievement, we can easily infer inirodkiction
that there was some power behind it,
Power doesn't exist without a person
or system. So, it's beret to areslyze it ii
terms of its relation with its hokler. — —
“Power tends to corrupt and
power corrupts absolutely’ —this ls the power and
experience of history ‘ leorruption
a
Bat why does power corrupt? why power
' cornepts
Surprisingly. power also corrupts
. en
+
; Powers
It's & necessary evil, | HecSasary
Les Ry

"Power tends to corrupt and absolute power corrupts
absolutely" —this is the experience of history. When
men assume power. they realize who they are and forget who they
were, and do not consider who others are. Then "Might is ight”
Effective Whiting Skills For Advanced Leamern
Updated Bangla e-books(pdf): www.facebook.comAanbir.ebooks
becomes their i ipl i

management, social systems—all tend to get corrupted.

But why does power corrupt? li is a very easy question
to answer but perhaps the most difficult problem to solve. There
are some evident reasons. In most of the cases, “Power is ever
stealing from the many to the few". Man's selfishness and greed are
the reat of it all. Again, power corrupts the most when it goes to
the wrong people. And it is our bitter experience that “The wrong
people are always in power because if they were not the wrong
ones, they would not be in power.” This is because power itself is
cared in a corrupted way in most of the cases. Consequently, it
goes only 10 those who are corrupted. Excessive power and power
to wrong people—both are dangerous and destructive

Surprisingly, power also corrupts the powerless.
The powerless, having heen exploited and tortured by the powerful,
make bath legal and illegal attempts to gain power. which
ultimately result in power-play and more destruction. At that
stage,power tempts both the powerful and the powerless.

Power destroys, no doubt, but without it nothing constructive
can be possible, Hence it is a necessary evil. All we can say
to the powerful is that "He who has great power should use it
lightly",

The best merit of this plan is that as you prepare the plan, you
set yourself thinking. As a result, your control over the subject is
increased. It has another major advantage. Suppose a good subject
of kdea comes to your mind, but you don't have the time to write an
essay on it just now, because at present you're busy writing
another essay. In such a case, you can convert your idea into such
a plan. The benefit is : later on, even after a long time. when you
want to write the essay, you can easily remember the main aspects
of the idea. You'll not forget anything, Also,this method ensures
good transition of thought. But remember one point : when you
actually write the essay, don't disregard (47 Gm) any new idea
which comes to your mind. Your plan should not limit your
thoughts and obstruct your creativity.

a a ee ee
www. faceboox.com/tanvir.ebooks

All e-books & Software : www.tanbircox.blogspot.com
